---
layout: post
title: "Critical Race Theory: What Is It?"
author: "Morgan Gibson"
feature_image: /cogito-xii-pictures/gibson.jpeg
categories:
- Cogito-XII
- Articles
---
Rekindled by the racial reckoning of our modern society in 2020, Critical Race Theory (CRT) is one of the most controversial topics regarding combating racism. According to CRT,"racism is a fundamental part of American society, not simply an aberration that can be easily corrected by law." As a legal framework of thinking based on the belief that racism is systemic and embedded in the laws and regulations that govern everyday life, CRT originated in the mid-1970s from the philosophical writings of Derrick Bell. Over the past few years, a reversal of advances made by the Civil Rights Movement has occurred. These changes have included but have not been limited to the resegregation of public schools."In 1988, about 44% of black students went to majority-white schools nationally; only 20% of black students do so today." In response to these reversals, legal scholars began creating frameworks and theories for combating racial inequality. While CRT originated from the United States, it was almost immediately disputed internationally. Currently, there has been division over how teachers teach the history of racism to youth, and ignorance regarding CRT merely exacerbates the issue. Some teachers believe young children cannot comprehend hard truths about historical events or actions taken by groups of people, such as slavery or Christopher Columbus'"journey to America." Instead of teaching the reality, too many teachers choose only to teach false narratives to"protect children." There are differences in how different countries deal with this new push for CRT; the one commonality is that no one can decide what to do.

Critical Race Theory is crucial to fostering a better and more inclusive world for the next generation in the face of resistance. CRT intends not to make white people feel guilty about slavery or their ancestors' actions. Instead, CRT opens up the conversation about race-related issues by encouraging everyone not to shy away from history but confront it from a diverse array of perspectives to gain a fuller understanding. Moreover, CRT recognizes the privilege different people have and how they affect the systems that govern our daily lives. It is disappointing that a mere lack of understanding leads people to dispute a framework that will allow a more equitable and fair world for us all. As North Carolina State University professor Michael Schwalbe who has taught CRT, argues,"The real threat posed by CRT is not that it causes guilt and division, as uninformed critics have claimed, but that it can do the opposite: extinguish unproductive guilt and bring together people who want to create an America that lives up to its ideals of fairness and meritocracy."

Why is Critical Race Theory so controversial? People do not understand what CRT truly is and become immediately closed off to the framework's ideas. Opponents of CRT say that they are not fighting against teaching Black History. They argue that CRT teaches their children that they are racist simply because they are white. A national survey conducted in 2021 found that 33% of adults believe that CRT"says that white people are inherently bad or evil." The belief that CRT reprimands all white people as oppressors and classifies all Black people as victims are simply untrue. Even so, this thinking has sparked the banning of certain books and CRT as a whole in K-12 classrooms internationally. In actuality, CRT does not contend that all white people are racist. Instead, it advocates that all history should be taught regardless of race and not just from a Eurocentric or Americentric point of view."The theory says that racism is part of everyday life, so people—white or nonwhite—who don't intend to be racist can nevertheless make choices that fuel racism." This is a critical aspect of CRT that is lost in translation. People often become defensive because they believe that Critical Race Theory is accusing them of being racists when this is not the case.

As Critical Race Theory spreads from America to around the world, subsequent backlash greets it. In August 2021, private schools in South Africa began teaching CRT to students. Citizens of South Africa still feel the legacy of racial discrimination and inequality left by Apartheid to this day. Apartheid was a system that upheld policies that segregated the non-white majority in South Africa. Apartheid fostered racial discrimination and white supremacy for decades. Opposition to CRT in South Africa uses the division between whites and non-whites to argue why CRT should not be taught. An article resisting CRT from a South African news source states,"CRT's origins are American with specific reference to American history and a society where blacks are a minority group. Given the fact of our dreadful history and that whites currently comprise less than 10% of the population, the consequences of this racial essentialism will be disastrous." Many agree with this way of thinking, contending that the separation among the people of South Africa caused by the legacy of Apartheid, we should not teach CRT. The argument is that teaching Critical Race Theory would worsen the issue by making white people out to be the antagonists. The Institute of Race Relations in South Africa has launched an initiative called 'Educate, don't Indoctrinate'" in an attempt to equip parents and teachers with the tools necessary to recognize and resist the spread of the 'harmful ideas of CRT in schools.'" This initiative in South Africa is very similar to one that took place during former President Donald Trump's presidency. Trump signed an executive order (President Biden has since reversed that) entitled the 1776 Commission to create a"national commission to support patriotic education." However, the issue with both of these efforts against CRT is that they would only be shielding students from uncomfortable truths regarding race that are a part of the fabric of society. Ironically as sociologist Victor Ray notes, "making laws outlawing critical race theory confirms the point that racism is embedded in the law."
