---
layout: post
title: "Falling Apart: Liz Truss’ Failed Conservative Party"
author: "Simon Juknelis"
feature_image: /cogito-xiii-pictures/juknelis.jpeg
categories:
  - Cogito-XIII
  - Articles
---
On September 6, 2022, in her final official act of state, Queen Elizabeth II met privately with Liz Truss in Balmoral Castle, Scotland. This was the “kissing hands” ceremony, the result of which was Truss’ appointment as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. Amid the ceremonies that followed the Queen’s death just two days later, Truss faded from the headlines of the international press. Eventually, however, controversy once again sprang up regarding the policies that the then-new prime minister and her party, the Conservatives, planned to enact. This controversy ultimately arose from the fact that, despite this being the Conservatives’ twelfth consecutive year in power, the party is more divided than ever.

The recent history of factionalism in the Conservative Party began on January 15, 2019, under former Prime Minister Theresa May with the single greatest parliamentary loss for a ruling political party in British history. This was the vote on whether or not to approve May’s Brexit deal. Normally in the British parliament, legislators, known as Members of Parliament (MPs), are told how to vote by their party leadership, and failure to follow these instructions can result in disciplinary action up to and including expulsion from the party. This means that parliamentary votes are usually not good indicators of factionalism in a party because only those who are willing to leave or break apart the party entirely will defect. However, there was an unusually high number of plans for Brexit being considered in Parliament at this time. The plans on offer ranged from leaving the EU with no deal up to retaining free movement between the UK and the EU. Due to this wide range of opinions, May decided that Conservative MPs would be allowed a “conscience vote” on the Brexit deal; that is, each MP would be free to vote as they wanted. May then suffered a crushing defeat: 202 MPs voted in favor of her proposal and 432 voted against. Moreover, about a month later, the British parliament expressed no confidence in May’s overall negotiating strategy with the EU by a vote of 303 to 258. These conscience votes gave a rare glimpse into the inner state of the Conservative Party. While Conservative MPs are supposed to act as a united front, all wholeheartedly supporting the policies laid out in their party manifesto, this vote revealed a group of politicians that became bitterly divided as soon as a controversial issue arose.

On July 5, 2022, Rishi Sunak, Chancellor of the Exchequer (the equivalent to the American Secretary of the Treasury), resigned from Boris Johnson’s cabinet. This took place days after new information was released concerning Conservative MP Chris Pincher, who had recently been appointed by Johnson to the important position of Chief Whip. It was revealed that Pincher had committed several acts of sexual assault over the previous years and that Johnson was well-aware of this when he appointed Pincher. Sunak’s official letter of resignation did not directly mention the scandal, instead simply reading that “the public rightly expect government to be conducted properly, competently, and seriously.” It was believed by some that the events concerning Pincher were the final straw for Sunak. Following Sunak’s resignation, more than 50 other members of Johnson’s government followed suit and resigned in the wake of the Pincher scandal. These events culminated in Johnson announcing his resignation on July 7, two days later. The whole process yet again put on display severe disunity among the Conservatives, this time due to an untrustworthy and immoral party leader. During the ensuing campaign for who would become the next leader of the Conservative Party – and Prime Minister of the UK – Conservative MPs gradually eliminated relatively neutral candidates such as Tom Tugendhat and Kemi Badenoch until only two remained: Sunak and Liz Truss. After the MPs had their say, the question was put to Conservative party members across the UK, and on September 2, they elected Liz Truss by a margin of 15 percentage points. This marks a significant disconnect between rank-and-file party members and their representatives in Parliament, as, during the final MP ballot, MPs favored Sunak over Truss by 8 points. From the start to the end of the Conservative Party election saga, Conservative MPs as well as ordinary party members ended up divided along several different lines.

Once Truss was formally chosen as Prime Minister, the most important issue facing her was the cost-of-living crisis in the UK. Due to COVID-19 and inflation, the British pound sterling had been greatly devalued, and the prices of most essentials had skyrocketed; the rise in electricity prices was widely cited as the most pressing aspect of this crisis. Truss, together with her newly appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer, Kwasi Kwarteng, proposed a new economic stimulus plan dubbed a “mini-budget.” The mini-budget contained several unpopular provisions, of which the most notable was the permanent elimination of the 45% income tax rate on the UK’s highest earners. The pair refused to submit the plan to the Office of Budget Responsibility or OBR, a panel of experts that would have produced a report on the expected effects of the mini-budget on the economy. It cannot be known for certain what outlook the OBR would have given on the plan, but in a conference with the Treasury Committee of the House of Commons, some [senior] economists stated that the mini-budget could not achieve the economic growth targeted by Truss. Due to public criticism, the media, and members of her party, including the former minister for the environment and housing, Truss dismissed Kwarteng as her Chancellor on October 14, effectively killing the mini-budget and admitting defeat on her first real proposal as Prime Minister. Kwarteng became the second-shortest-serving Chancellor in British history, and the shortest-serving Chancellor to leave by resigning or being dismissed (the only person to beat Kwarteng’s record did so because he died in office). Truss had failed to rally her party together towards any solution to the most pressing issue of the day, and her inability to do even this made it clear that her premiership was untenable.

The next general election in the UK is not required until 2025. However, with the premierships of both May and Johnson lasting for only two years and Truss’ for just a few weeks, the exact path the British government – which is now led by Rishi Sunak – will take until then is unclear. An election could be called before 2024, but the only person able to do so is the Prime Minister, and it is unlikely he would want to risk the Conservative majority in Parliament for the chance of more Conservative MPs being elected who align with her views. But whenever that election happens, the Conservatives will have a choice to make: either figure out a party line that all can agree to, or find themselves working out their issues from the opposition side of the aisle.