---
layout: post
title: "Microchip Supply Chains Fuel National Security Concerns"
author: "Jeffrey Liu"
feature_image: /cogito-xiii-pictures/liu.jpeg
categories:
  - Cogito-XIII
  - Articles
---
Microchips form an ever present part of our lives as our worlds become increasingly digitized. Microchips are the components that run modern electronics. They are the brains, converting binary code into directions for the rest of the device to execute. Without them, life as we know it wouldn’t exist. Your phones wouldn’t turn on, planes would crash, and the worldwide Global Positioning System would go down. The nation that controls the microchip supply chain could cut off the access of others to these essential commodities. Because of their strategic importance, microchip supply chains are undergoing rapid transformation to ensure economic resilience and national security. The United States recently signed the Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors and Science Act of 2022 (CHIPS and Science Act) into law, funding 52 billion dollars towards advancing microchip manufacturing and research. However, America is not alone in its newfound interest in the industry, and the competition is heating up to control the supply of electronics.

Because microchips are critical components in trillions of dollars of products, any downturn in microchip production would result in an exorbitant impact across the entire global supply chain. The importance of microchip procurement was made evident by the Covid-19 pandemic, when the global automobile industry experienced 61 billion dollars in lost sales during 2021 as the result of disastrous supply chain interruptions. Microchip shortages also had a huge impact on the smartphone industry. Sales were down six percent during Q4 of 2021 as manufacturers struggled to meet demand.

As of 2022, the vast majority of microchips are manufactured in Asia in factories known as foundries. Foundries in Taiwan produce 66 percent of total microchip revenues. South Korea is a distant second at 17 percent, and China further behind with 8 percent. All other foundries only produce 9 percent of total microchips revenues when combined. This supply chain centralization leads to unique geopolitical tension in the region, particularly between China and Taiwan. China claims that the island of Taiwan is a part of its territory under the “One China Principle.” However, Taiwan’s friendly relationship with the United States could lead to American pressure on the island to reduce or completely cease the sale of advanced microchips to China. As a result, foundries based in Taiwan are at increased risk of disruption for all nations, which would paralyze the global economy.

With tensions on the rise, governments around the world are rushing to secure their microchip supply. The United States and China in particular have taken significant steps to expand their own production capabilities. In addition to the CHIPS and Science Act, the United States has announced tight export controls aimed at cutting off China’s access to advanced chips and technologies. Specifically, the United States has taken aim at the People’s Liberation Army, China’s armed forces, by ordering corporations to cease the flow of advanced manufacturing equipment and microchips that may have military applications. Correspondingly, China has announced plans to invest 1.4 trillion dollars into advanced technologies, including microchip development, in order to achieve self-sufficiency in key industries. Reduced dependency on outside nations would allow China to mitigate the impact of sanctions from the United States and its allies. If successful, this will lead to a weakening of America’s international dominance and technological edge.

Microchips are increasingly playing a role in the growth of our economy, but the centralized manufacturing of much of the world’s supply in Taiwan means that geopolitical tensions in the region could prove disastrous and lead to a collapse in the global supply chain. In response, governments are taking an increased role in the microchips industry in order to protect their national security interests and secure their supply in an arms race for this vital resource.
