---
layout: post
title: "The Interconnectedness of Politics and Technology in the Stock Market"
author: "Arav Santhanam"
feature_image: /cogito-xiii-pictures/santhanam.jpeg
categories:
  - Cogito-XIII
  - Articles
---
The technological revolution and digital age have dramatically influenced the global financial landscape. From novel means of efficient data processing to automatic surveillance and monitoring methods, these advancements have had an unprecedented impact. However, increasing political polarization among citizens and government, especially in the United States, has impacted these economic systems and the ability to track them in a variety of ways. Government regulations, international crises, and other political events can influence the stock market, with effects ranging from minor drops in company-specific performance to sparking heightened market volatility. While the effects of politics on stock prices can be superseded by larger economic trends, they can still play a vital role in determining short or mid-term gains or losses. The relationship between politics and financial markets is a two-way street – investor strategies to forecast these markets and other factors can also prove to have political ramifications. As the Digital Age has flourished, the development of financial technology (Fintech) has exposed the interconnection between economic markets and politics in forecasting, security, and accessibility.

Algorithmic trading, a tool for investors to minimize risk in forecasting markets with better accuracy, has become more popular as a result of recent AI innovation. Algorithmic trading is the use of computer programs defined with specific sets of instructions, or algorithms, to execute trades based on a variety of factors, such as current stock prices and future projections. These technologies have also been subject to increasing political scrutiny due to their ability to create artificial market volatility and impact stocks in unnatural ways. However, many investors and economists rely on machines to quickly and effectively sift through millions of data points and provide them with valuable quantitative analysis. These algorithms can also execute trades in fractions of a second, allowing investors to better take advantage of lucrative prices, remove the uncertainty of human emotion, and reduce transaction costs. Today, 70-80% of trading in US financial markets is executed by such algorithms.

Algorithmic trading has reshaped financial markets by allowing people without robust knowledge of stocks to participate in the economy by allowing them to take advantage of pre-programmed and custom trading strategies. As a result, the demographics of those profiting from financial markets has changed, especially given the emergence of these new financial technologies that place the global economy at people’s fingertips. Marc Lenglet, an associate professor in the Strategy and Entrepreneurship Department at the NEOMA Business School clarifies the political ramifications of economic globalization by describing such algorithms as “political objects”  that have the potential to threaten economic regulations and stability, emphasizing the role of technology in contributing to and shaping the politics of the market. However, as valuable as market forecasting is to investors, it is impossible without adequate tools. Without methods to perform efficient data synthesis and analysis, human investors are left at a disadvantage that has been exacerbated by the rise and dominance of the tech era, fighting futilely against a robot-driven financial ecosystem. Furthermore, in stark contrast to traditional statistical models, elaborate forecasting AI can be designed to accurately capture correlations between political and economic outcomes. This is done through news headlines, some of the most widely accessible sources of information, by AI’s discovery of sentiment, word choice, and other common patterns in text, strategies have also been explored by a variety of researchers and investors., However, while AI has allowed for more accurate methods of data collection and processing, it can also be used to provide its users with unfair advantages over human investors. The increasing proliferation of this technology has only underscored uncertainty among public and private groups about the morality of technology such as high-frequency trading (HFT), leading to calls for greater supervision from agencies such as the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA)

Furthermore, the proliferation of emerging blockchain and cryptocurrency technologies has revealed the intricate connections between politics and finance – especially surrounding government regulatory policies. Specifically, blockchain technology is an advanced database system to securely store data distributed among a decentralized computer network by making the data as near impossible to hack or change without approval, and a common application of this technology is in the cryptocurrency domain. In prior months, the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has been battling to place the same financial regulations applicable to traditional securities (tradable financial assets prevalent in markets) to cryptocurrencies and other ICOs (Initial Coin Offerings), nearly doubling the size of their enforcement Crypto Assets and Cyber Unit. To this end, SEC Chair Gary Gensler has also signaled for cryptocurrency exchanges to register as official trading platforms with the SEC, part of a larger national effort to crack down on market manipulation, money laundering, and potential economic uncertainty with such currencies. Regardless, the US government has demonstrated itself to be willing to offer protections to investors in crypto markets to allow for streamlined transactions and to minimize the risks of cyber threats. Many believe this to be a necessary step due to the ubiquitous nature of cryptocurrency – an NBC News poll has found that 1 in 5 Americans have traded in crypto – further underscoring the need for strict government oversight, specifically in categorizing crypto assets as securities or commodities (basic economic goods like oil and gold that can be bought, traded, and exchanged).,The proliferation of blockchain technology as a powerful security mechanism in the cryptocurrency sphere has underscored the need for more stringent government regulations, especially given the ever-increasing electoral influence of crypto billionaires who can also use their network to enact political change that more directly serves their interests through their endorsements of candidates for political office.

Tech transformation has disproportionately influenced every aspect of society, from government to healthcare to the people themselves. Swiftly-developing fintech innovation has unearthed a fascinating interplay between politics, technology, and financial markets. From the political consequences of algorithmic trading to government regulation surrounding blockchain and cutting-edge cryptocurrency technology, the promising yet potentially dangerous role of politics in fintech and stock markets has only become more obvious – and is something investors, policymakers, and today’s youth will have to grapple with in the years to come.
