---
layout: post
title: "How the Widespread Adoption of Mobile Devices Has Affected Warfare"
author: "Alan Cai"
feature_image: /cogito-xiii-pictures/cai.png
categories:
  - Cogito-XIII
  - Articles
---
On February 24th, 2022, as Vladimir Putin declared “a special military operation” in Ukraine, Russian forces poured across the border into Ukraine. Russian divisions crossed into Ukraine from the north near Chernobyl and in the south from occupied Crimea as artillery pounded Ukrainian frontline positions across the war-torn landscape of the Donbas. As Russian troops swarmed into Ukraine, Ukrainian civilians and soldiers flooded social media with countless videos of Russian columns advancing across the country. Images, live streams, and online reports of heroic defenses mounted by Ukrainian defenders in border cities such as Sumy, Chernihiv, and Kherson spread throughout the internet, spreading the plight of the Ukrainian people across the world, and assisted Ukranians in gathering key information to act to protect their livelihoods and lives. Much of this crucial early information came from mobile devices, which allowed citizens and soldiers alike to record and share their experiences across cities and towns in Ukraine. The prevalence of smartphones in both military and civilian populations has massively transformed modern warfare, as shown by the recent invasion of Ukraine. 

The widespread usage of cell phones in Ukraine has allowed videos, photos, and reports of military movements to reach the internet. With help from a strong internet infrastructure and new satellite internet technology, the internet service in Ukraine has remained relatively consistent, even in the midst of heavy fighting, allowing information to continue to disseminate freely even in the midst of a large-scale conflict. Across sites such as Tiktok, Telegram, Reddit, and Twitter, thousands of posts, images, and videos are made daily, tracking both Russian and Ukrainian troop movements. These are largely captured by civilians inhabiting the Ukrainian warzone. However, soldiers in the conflict have also used social media: there is a wealth of footage online from both frontline Russian and Ukrainian units depicting heavy urban assaults, drone combat, desperate defensive actions, and other combat operations. Mobile devices like cell phones allow soldiers to access social media and upload these videos and information even in the midst of active war zones in difficult environments due to their accessibility, portability, and ease of use. Even soldiers stuck in the besieged Azovstal Steel Plant in Mariupol were able to hold press conferences on their phones from their bunkers deep in the superstructure of the plant, allowing them to communicate with the outside world while under a protracted siege by Russian forces. The unrestrained spread of information has been highly important in holding Russia accountable for its war of aggression and shaping the narrative around the war. The availability of information from Ukraine has put international pressure on Russia and has increased the knowledge and focus of the world on Ukraine, paving the way for an outpouring of worldwide support leading to public pressure and diplomatic victories for Ukraine. 

At the same time, military personnel with cell phones have been detrimental to the operational security of their armies. The relatively simple acquisition of troop locations in the field from cell phone data has plagued modern militaries and has had a deadly impact on warfare. Geolocation has been especially useful in the current Ukrainian conflict, with reports of Ukrainian troops striking Russian command posts and troop positions by geolocating Russian soldiers’ cell phone signals. Issues surrounding geolocation with cell phone data have led to calls for cell phone bans to mitigate risk within the world’s militaries. Other strategies include conducting calls away from military infrastructure or SIM card swapping in order to throw off enemy tracking systems. Recently, the US army banned its troops from deploying to the Middle East with their cell phones or other electronic devices due to fears that their operations and deployments could be leaked through cyber attacks or cell phone data. In the Ukraine War, both sides have taken steps to protect their military positions and troops from the risks of using cell phones in combat zones to respond to this deadly new issue, although it has been reported that several Russian command posts have already been struck by Ukrainian troops through intercepted phone calls that revealed the location of Russian units. 

Furthermore, the widespread adoption of phones have made it viable for Ukrainians to establish apps and other reporting systems where civilians can geolocate and feed footage of Russian troops to the Ukrainian government, enabling Ukrainian intelligence to better place strikes on Russian forces. This has only been made possible by the widespread usage of cell phones by a large population, such as in Ukraine. Efforts to report Russian troops online have gone hand-in-hand with the widespread dissemination of information and footage relating to Russian and Ukrainian troop movements and operations on global platforms such as Telegram. Online users have also helped geolocate troop movements on sites such as Twitter and Telegram. 

As seen in Ukraine, information gathering from a wide variety of sources, made possible through the prevalence of cell phones, has allowed for reporting of information from even the most dangerous and inaccessible areas of the world, and has also created tools and systems that save lives. With civilians having widespread access to cell phones and other internet-connected devices, people are now able to receive information from conflicts in real time. The free and fast flow of information through phones can allow civilians to plan for incoming conflicts, disasters, and changes. Notifications about disastrous events allow people more time to prepare for them, saving lives. For example, Ukrainian developers have made several apps and Telegram channels to warn and notify citizens about incoming missile bombardments and aerial attacks on Ukrainian cities, giving Ukrianians time to seek shelter. One warning app, run by the Ukranian Ministry of Digital Transformation, had over 11 million users in August 2022. These information notification apps have helped save lives, and their widespread adoption has been made possible by access to cell phones. 
Overall, the prevalence of mobile phones in the current era has made both receiving and reporting information much more accessible to the public, saving lives and allowing people to be informed about conflicts far from their immediate area. At the same time, it has ushered in a new form of digital warfare, using cell phone data as a tool for death and destruction. The events in Ukraine help show the impact of cell phones on the dynamic and constantly evolving field of warfare. However, it still remains to be seen how much impact the extensive usage of cell phones will have on the future of warfare. 