---
layout: post
title: "How Trump’s Politicization of the DOJ Created a Lose-Lose Gamble for Merrick Garland"
author: "Joshua Levine"
feature_image: /cogito-xiii-pictures/levine.jpeg
categories:
  - Cogito-XIII
  - Articles
---
The Justice Manual, a handbook for Federal Attorneys and Department of Justice (DOJ) officials, states in section 1-8.100: “The rule of law depends upon the evenhanded administration of justice. The legal judgments of the Department of Justice must be impartial and insulated from political influence. It is imperative that the Department’s investigatory and prosecutorial powers be exercised free from partisan consideration.” The Trump Administration’s involvement of the DOJ in partisan issues, including investigating Former President Donald Trump’s political enemies and interfering with his allies’ sentencings, was unprecedented. Throughout the 2020 Presidential Election, Trump attempted to use the DOJ to disrupt the counting of legal votes and overturn the election in his favor. Since his exit from office, Trump’s legal challenges have continued to mount; the most notable of these criminal cases is his removal of classified documents from the White House. Former President Trump and his administration’s corrupt usage of the DOJ created a lose-lose scenario for current Attorney General Merrick Garland: Garland can either prosecute Former President Trump for his alleged federal crimes with the risk of the DOJ appearing even more overtly partisan, or allow the federal laws to crumble by ignoring criminal behavior that threatens national security.

In late 2017, then-President Trump began to corrupt the DOJ by asking the agency to investigate his political opponents. Trump encouraged federal law enforcement to “do what [was] right and proper,” asking the DOJ to launch a new criminal probe of his rival from the 2016 Presidential Election, Hillary Clinton. On November 3, 2017, Trump continued by tweeting, “Pocahontas [Senator Elizabeth Warren] just stated that the Democrats, lead [...] by the legendary Crooked Hillary Clinton, rigged the Primaries! Lets [...] go FBI & Justice Dept.” He soon denied interference with the DOJ, saying “[he was] not involved with the Justice Department. [...] But honestly, they should be looking at the Democrats.” Since his early days in office, President Trump intertwined himself with the DOJ. He asked federal officials to launch partisan investigations, ignoring their responsibility to an equal rule of law.

Trump’s behavior in connection with his longtime ally Roger Stone’s criminal sentencing was yet another example of his interference with the DOJ. In 2020, Trump commuted Stone’s criminal sentence of forty months in jail, claiming that “Stone [was] a victim of the Russia Hoax.” In a statement from the Trump Administration, written more like a speech for a Trump rally, the Administration criticized “out-of-control Mueller prosecutors, desperate for splashy headlines to compensate for a failed investigation” and called the criminal case a “witch hunt.” Stone had illegally attempted to protect Trump, and a federal jury subsequently convicted Stone on seven counts of lying to Congress, obstruction of Justice, and witness tampering. Senator Mitt Romney (R-UT) explained his perspective on Trump’s actions: “Unprecedented, historic corruption: an American president commutes the sentence of a person convicted by a jury of lying to shield that very president.” Senator Romney was one of few Republican members of Congress that were willing to speak out against Trump’s actions. Romney’s criticism of Trump shows the appalling nature of Trump’s actions.

Trump’s interference with the DOJ also drew a sharp rebuke from many of the agency’s members. 2,689 members of the DOJ (Agents, Attorneys, Staffers, Advisors, etc.) wrote a letter rejecting Trump’s actions during the Roger Stone Case:

“We, the undersigned, are alumni of the United States Department of Justice (DOJ) who have collectively served both Republican and Democratic administrations. Each of us strongly condemns President Trump’s and Attorney General Barr’s interference in the fair administration of justice.”

Former Senator Bob Corker (R-TN) also discussed his perspectives on the Trump Administration's DOJ, saying, “President Trump’s pressuring of the Justice Department and FBI to pursue cases against his adversaries and calling for punishment before trials take place are totally inappropriate and not only undermine our justice system but erode the American people’s confidence in our institutions.” The condemnation of President Trump’s actions by members of the DOJ and his own party indicates the extent of his corrupt actions.

	Between the 2020 Presidential Election and President Biden’s Inauguration, the Trump administration’s unprecedented political cooperation with the DOJ did not stop, despite facing strong criticism from government officials and politicians representing a wide spectrum of political backgrounds. In a December 27, 2020 conversation with then-Acting Attorney General Jeffrey Rosen and Acting Deputy Attorney General Richard Donoghue, Trump said, “What I'm just asking you [the DOJ] to do is just say [the 2020 Presidential Election] was corrupt and leave the rest to me and the Republican congressmen.” Donoghue testified to this conversation during a hearing held by the Select Committee to Investigate the January 6th Attack on the United States Capitol on July 22, 2022. In June 2021, the House Oversight Committee released 232 pages of DOJ documents demonstrating how the Trump Administration colluded with the DOJ before, during, and after the 2020 Election. Representative Carolyn Maloney (D-NY-12), the Chairwoman of the House Oversight Committee, summarized the committee’s findings, saying "These documents show that President Trump tried to corrupt our nation's chief law enforcement agency in a brazen attempt to overturn an election that he lost." The House Oversight Committee is the main committee responsible for investigation in the House of Representatives. Chairwoman Maloney has access to a myriad of documents on the issue, and her statement was well-informed by classified and unclassified documents.

	In addition to the criminal and civil cases being brought against Former President Trump surrounding the January 6th Insurrection, there are many other cases where Trump has faced legal jeopardy. The most notable of these cases is Trump’s unwarranted removal of classified documents from the White House after his presidency. After Trump failed to return these missing documents, the FBI came to his Mar-a-Lago residence to retrieve them. A recent court filing indicates that about 11,000 documents and 200,000 pages of documents were removed from Trump's Mar-a-Lago estate; more than one hundred of these documents were classified or highly classified. 18 U.S. Code § 1924 refers to the “unauthorized removal and retention of classified documents or material.” Any individual connected to the United States government that possesses “documents or materials containing classified information of the United States [...] without authority and with the intent to retain such documents [...] at an unauthorized location” is to be “fined [...] or imprisoned for not more than five years, or both.” Given the current evidence, this part of the American legal code may be applicable to Trump’s actions.

	The current DOJ, led by Attorney General Merrick Garland, faces issues created by the Trump Administration’s DOJ as it considers whether or not to prosecute Trump for his alleged criminal actions. Mid-2022 national polling from Gallup shows that trust in the country’s criminal justice system fell to 14%. This confidence was only higher than Americans’ trust in television news (11%) and Congress (7%). Further, 57% of poll respondents in a separate Rasmussen study believed that the DOJ was too political. While this polling is useful, Rasmussen’s pro-Republican bias must be taken into account.

This lack of trust in the DOJ has created a predicament for Garland. Should Garland choose to prosecute Trump, many may view him as extending the DOJ’s involvement in politics. If Trump, the likely 2024 Republican Presidential nominee, were to be prosecuted, Trump would likely argue that he is only being prosecuted for political reasons. Many of Trump’s supporters would believe and agree with this. On the other hand, should Garland choose to leave Trump alone, he will seemingly be giving Trump a free pass on facing legal consequences. As noted above, any unauthorized removal of American government classified documents is criminal under 18 U.S. Code § 1924. So, if Garland does not prosecute Trump with evidence continuing to grow against him, he may lose the trust of the majority of Americans relying on his DOJ to uphold and fairly execute American laws.

Garland faces many challenges as he takes over the DOJ without considering the “Trump factor”; once the Trump administration’s politicization of the DOJ is added into the equation, his job becomes even tougher. As explained earlier, Attorney General Garland’s potential options have both positive and negative consequences. Garland’s choice will inevitably become nationally scrutinized news with no satisfactory result in public discourse.

Ultimately, Garland must follow his commitment to the rule of law. In a speech given on his first day as Attorney General, Garland told members of the DOJ, “Together, we will show the American people that the Department of Justice pursues equal justice and adheres to the rule of law.” Although some throughout the country do not want former President Trump to be prosecuted, and, further, although the optics of charging Trump may be poor, Garland and his DOJ must follow the law and apply it equally. If there is evidence of criminal activity, it must be prosecuted.