---
layout: post
title: "Post-Truth Space: An Examination of Social Media’s Influence on American Politics"
author: "Annabel Abdelal"
feature_image: /cogito-xiii-pictures/abdelal.jpeg
categories:
  - Cogito-XIII
  - Articles
---
“There are very few things in American culture, whether it’s media organizations or music groups or bands, that do not have some kind of political association.” As social media becomes a greater presence in our lives, it is important to recognize the ways in which it impacts the decisions we make. American politicians are increasingly using social media to communicate and campaign. The advertisements and messages displayed on social media can have a major impact on national and even global events by affecting the political desicions of billions of people. Although social media has expanded the political landscape by reaching broader audiences, its influence may not be as positive or unbiased as some would like to think.

One example of how social media influences politics is the methods they use to engage users, specifically one called detailed targeting. It’s no secret that the posts, reels, and messages you see on social media are curated specifically for you. In other words, apps get to know you, thereby allowing them to personalize your feed, gather more of your information, and occupy more of your time. This can apply to the music you listen to, the sports teams you support, and even your shopping habits. Detailed targeting allows political figures to choose what types of people they want to reach. Marco Rubio, a US senator, “hopes to sway voters interested in Chick-fil-A, Ram trucks, and Duck Dynasty. John Fetterman is searching for fans of microbreweries, Teslas and the Dave Matthews Band.” The more times you watch videos of TikTok dances or ASMR or funny dogs, the more they will show up on your feed. The same concept applies to detailed targeting, but the outcome is not as harmless, as it can have drastic effects on political outcomes.

The main reason people use social media is to stay updated on news, and campaigns regularly use social media platforms as their main communication channels with potential voters. As these platforms become more and more mainstream, increasing numbers of people are relying on social media for their daily news input. However, this digital space of social media, one of the greatest influences on our lives, is biased. So, in general, who does social media favor? Studies show that Republicans get more engagement through likes, replies, and reposts from users. Democrats, however, are much more likely to spend on social media. In twenty of the most contested US senate and governor races, Democratic candidates “are using Facebook and Instagram ads far more than their opponents, spending more than $4 million for ads on the platforms between mid-August and mid-September, compared to about $645,000 by Republicans.” Overall, Democrats get the biggest publicity boost from social media, and Republicans engage more with their intended audiences. Although in different ways, both parties gain publicity and interaction with voters through social media.

In addition to the information spread by politicians, the facet of social media that creates the most influential and harmful results comes from ordinary users’ability to remain anonymous. Hiding behind superficial usernames, almost anyone can put almost anything on the internet, including fake news, propaganda, and jokes gone wrong. On Twitter, false information is 70% more likely to be retweeted than true information.” As misleading and deceptive information circulates, it becomes harder to discern fact from fiction. In addition, people inherently seek out information that confirms their political beliefs as a type of confirmation bias. In the digital age, that information probably exists somewhere, regardless of its veracity. Instead of making political decisions based on their own beliefs and truthful information, the unfortunate fact is that much of America is likely operating on fake or biased news because of…. In addition, “political news, in particular, spread[s] more than three times faster than tweets about terrorism, natural disasters, science, urban legends or financial information.” Information is more readily available in 2022, but it is also more easily changed and manipulated allowing for the increased spread of misinformation.

The expansive and somewhat strange landscape created by social media largely influences the decisions we make, political or otherwise. That same landscape makes truth harder to discern from falsehoods, and further separates the  digital world from reality. However, with new technology comes adaptability. Gen Z, having grown up in the digital age, has adapted to the fragmentation of truth magnified by the social media landscape. They are skeptical of the information they consume on the internet and seek evidence to confirm or deny that information. This is the adaptation that allows us to survive and even thrive in the ever-changing world of the digital age.
