---
layout: post
title: "Australian Ecosystems are Devastated, and so is The Tourism Economy"
author: "Katie Cheung"
feature_image: https://static.wixstatic.com/media/147d93_80df6d21f51e44789429fb2f22647405~mv2.jpg/v1/fill/w_1480,h_985,al_c,q_90/147d93_80df6d21f51e44789429fb2f22647405~mv2.webp
categories:
  - Cogito IX
  - Articles
---
The 2019 Australian wildfires have sparked both positive and negative reactions from around the world. Natural disasters such as this cannot be solved by individual efforts, and a global response is needed to mitigate them. Crucial ecosystems and a staggering percentage of species populations have been devastated. These fires have not only greatly impacted Australia’s natural landscape, they have also taken an unprecedented toll on Australia’s tourism industry.  

The environmental effects of these bushfires have been astronomical. Before the wildfires, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) organized the Paris Agreement, where Australia committed to cut emissions, which are responsible for rising global temperatures, by 26%-28% of 2005 levels by 2030. They were progressing steadily towards their goal as carbon emissions decreased from 622 million tons in 2007 to 538 million tons in 2013.  However, the decrease was not enough. Starting in June of 2019, blazes enveloped entire cities and coastlines of Australia, and all six Australian states reached record high temperatures which further magnified the fatal bushfires. These fires are especially catastrophic in a nation like Australia, where the 123 million hectares of forest seem to provide an endless amount of fire fuel. Furthermore, westward bound winds in the Southern Hemisphere pulled winter rains away from Australia, further intensifying the wildfires. Before the wildfires, Australia was incredibly biodiverse, home to unique organisms such as kangaroos, platypi, and koalas. After the fires, more than 1.25 billion animals were dead. These fires have further endangered a multitude of species, leaving deadly long-term repercussions.

Once the world understood the scale and intensity of the wildfires, other nations offered support. Crews of firefighters totaling approximately 200 people were sent to Australia from the United States and Canada. French President Emmanuel Macron said, "I called Prime Minister Scott Morrison this morning to offer immediate French operational assistance to fight fires, protect affected populations, and preserve biodiversity."  Australia’s neighbor, New Zealand, also sent 179 firefighters, 3 helicopters, and military personnel to Australia. In addition, Papua New Guinean Prime Minister, James Marape stated, "Australia is the closest friend of PNG… and we offer our hearts and our hands to you in this time of fire-induced tragedies."  As illustrated, international efforts played a critical role in providing Australia with the much needed support.

These wildfires have also left Australia with a struggling economy, which depends on millions of tourists coming from around the world to enjoy regions that are now obliterated. Queensland and New South Wales were the two states most affected by the wildfires. As of 2018, 4.3 million tourists traveled to New South Wales which amounted to $11.2 billion of revenue. In the same year, $6 billion was spent in Queensland, accounting for 19.6% of all dollars spent in Australia that year. Americans alone spent $4 billion in Australia, due to travel. This data illustrates how tourism is a key asset to Australia’s economy and one of the top providers for employment opportunities. But in 2019, the wildfires prevented Australians from bringing in revenue from tourists, putting the nation’s economy at great risk. Ferries in Sydney Harbor were cancelled due to poor visibility, and tourists had to evacuate from a campground in Shoalhaven. The Australian Tourism Industry Council (ATIC) said photographs depicting massive infernos and dying wildlife deterred a large number of visitors, leading to more lost revenue. Tourist towns, such as New South Wales, Batemans Bay and Mogo, were devastated, and tourists in Kosciuszko National Park were forced to cut their visits short. When visitors were forced to leave, the thousands of Australians working in the tourism industry lost their primary source of income. Executive Director of the Australian Tourism Industry Council (ATIC), Simon Westaway, said, “It is still too early to fully know and assess the commercial impact but it will clearly run into hundreds of millions of dollars over the near term.”  Millions of dollars in lost revenue will leave devastating short and long term effects on the tourism economy.

In response to the crisis, Prime Minister Scott Morrison and his advisors declared the implementation of a Relief Package totaling more than $2 billion. The document contained a $76 million Tourism Recovery Package, dedicated to communities that rely on international visitors for income. Westaway stated, “This Package’s scope and scale provides recognition of what the tourism industry now represents to our regions and the wider economy. It also importantly delivers an incredible and timely shot of confidence back into both our domestic and international tourism markets.” He also expressed approval for this Package by stating that a combined $34.5 million will be used to fund a “global marketing campaign” consisting of an expansion in international media and travel trade. These funds are designed to restabilize the Australian tourist economy and reassure visitors from around the world that travel to Australia is safe, and that the nation is still as beautiful as it was before the crisis.

Overall, persistent firefighting and seven months of flames have left a weathered trail of environmental and economic disparities. However, with valuable international support, Australia is on the path to recovery from this tragedy. It is imperative that everyone continues to reflect and learn from these wildfires, so that tragedies like these do not happen again.
