---
layout: post
title: "What’s Going on in the Space Economy"
author: "John Henry Lotz-McMillen"
feature_image: /cogito-xii-pictures/lotz-mcmillen.png
categories:
  - Cogito XII
  - Articles
---
One trillion dollars is the estimated economic potential of space commerce by 2040, as predicted by investment bank Morgan Stanley. It has been very exciting to watch the momentum towards that potential build, as well as how the private sector and government space agencies have been learning to symbiotically work together to create the space market of today. Due to a few morbid accidents and loss of life, as well as a lack of fiscal motivation, meticulously planned NASA projects that have sucked heavy funding from the public are now recognized as largely an artifact of the past. While NASA is getting back into major projects, the revitalization in humanity’s efforts to approach the final frontier can be largely attributed to the involvement of the private sector in making space ventures affordable.

Widely spotlighted in the news and with 64 commercial flights as of now, space tourism is what many think of when it comes to the space industry, but it is just a small slice of the market’s pie. While companies like Jeff Bezos' Space Origin certainly play a role in grabbing the attention of sponsors, tourism is just a small part of the “space access sector.” Other sectors of this economy include remote sensing, satellite data access and analytics, habitats and space stations, and beyond low earth orbit.  Space has been identified as its own “domain of commerce now,” according to the VP of Global Space Policy at Astroscale. There is so much potential for a multitude of industries to flourish, whether it’s cleaning up space debris to make space travel more sustainable, or capitalizing on the endless possibilities of satellite usage. Every rung in the ladder leading to the stars, from rocket design to launch sites, satellites to space habitats, to ships that will take us to Mars, brings a diversity of jobs and new innovations in technology. It will take more than careers in engineering to create a sustainable economic ecosystem. As stated by Marshall Smith, Senior Vice President of Space Systems at Nanoracks, “the rapid growth is going to bring in a new, young, diverse generation into the space world instead of just engineers… including marketing, design, and manufacturing - enough to create a whole economy.” There are already over 150,000 people working in private space, and the production of aerospace aircraft has encouraged a boost in advanced manufacturing of rockets and other technology. Even the externalities of the space industries—cleaning up and managing space debris orbiting the Earth that could damage satellites—foster potential for their own industries and jobs.

The ball towards this ideal relationship between humans and space is already rolling, as the expansive opportunities in space have facilitated a capitalistic environment in which growth is fueling growth: the more people are interested in space, the more money can go to scientific research and R&D of new technologies which subsequently enable new developments to catch peoples’ interests. Of course, compromises between competing nations, namely China, India, and the US, as well as between governments and corporations on space-activity regulations, will continue to be a difficult subject; however, the increasing partnerships between public agencies and private businesses allow for the “long-term sustainability and affordability” of the industry as a whole, according to the Deputy Director for the JFK Space Center, Kelvin Manning. An example of this are launch sites like the one at Cape Canaveral shared by NASA and companies like SpaceX, and the famous International Space Station built by NASA and Boeing that provides facilities for scientific research in low gravity. Governments that use the services and licensing of companies instead of focusing on their own building strategies help to establish foundational support for growth in the industry, especially since such institutions are reliable customers.

Because human activity in space is such uncharted territory, and the vast majority of international policy surrounding space was made around 50 years ago—for example, the 1967 Outer Space Treaty—there are still many questions around what the geopolitical landscape and property rights will look like. Furthermore, as businesses continue to grow their influence in space, it may prove difficult to define boundaries for a private agent as opposed to a government. In the meantime, the private-public partnerships that do exist, namely between NASA and US aerospace companies, help ensure the safety of space ventures, as honestly communicating collisions and accidents helps NASA track space debris and traffic. Meanwhile, China and India have carried out missile tests to destroy satellites, resulting in countless unnecessary satellite detritus traveling over 15000 miles/hour to plague orbits.

Due to the powerful demand for solutions to the climate crisis and other environmentally related issues, the space industry, which has been developing alongside these existential threats, naturally overlaps with sustainability endeavors. Earth observation, efficient energy sources, and communications are just some of the uses of space-related technologies. Especially at geostationary orbits, space provides the best vantage point meteorologists could ask for to study climate patterns. Earth observation also opens up critical opportunities for the monitoring of greenhouse gases, food security—for example, by reporting illegal fishing—and identifying areas with optimal solar or wind conditions. Currently, this facet of the space economy is relatively underappreciated, but companies like Morgan Stanley predict to see a lot more investment attention in the near future.
