---
layout: post
title: "Lessons From The Panthers: Radical Theory and Defiance"
author: "Jackie Zhang"
feature_image: /cogito-xii-pictures/zhang.jpeg
categories:
- Cogito XII
- Articles
---
On October 28, 1967, leaders of the Black Panther Party, Huey Newton and Gene McKinney, were stopped by members of the Oakland Police Department. The situation quickly escalated, resulting in Patrolman John Frey being killed, Patrolman Herbert Heanes becoming wounded, and Newton being critically injured and arrested. Newton was charged with murder, assault, and kidnapping, but the Black Panther Party immediately went to work rallying behind Newton to call for his release. This brought the Black Panther Party into national and global prominence, making Huey a revolutionary icon. The phrase “Free Huey!” was adopted by protests across the nation. Founded in 1966 in Oakland, California by Huey Newton and Bobby Seale, the Black Panther Party provided resources for poor and disenfranchised Black Americans, challenged law enforcement, and confronted the American government. Instead of assimilating into American society, they wanted to fundamentally change the system of American capitalism. As protestors navigate the inequities and violence that plague marginalized peoples in the present, the radical resistance, community organizing, and anti-capitalist theory of the Black Panther Party can inform social activists involved in current movements both nationwide and global.

 At Merritt College, Huey Newton met Bobby Seale, and the two co-founded the Black Panther Party for Self Defense. The Black Panther Party defined itself by resisting a long tradition of violence from law authorities and state oppression against disenfranchised Black communities. They spearheaded the movement for Black liberation which focused on dismantling racist, oppressive systems that were built to keep Black people from thriving in the United States, as well as organized young and poor Black Americans. The Party issued a ten-point program that called for armed protection against police oppression and radical changes in America's capitalist system. The Ten Point Program consisted of two sections with the first, titled "What We Want Now!" which described what the Black Panther Party wanted from the leaders of American Society. The second section was titled "What We Believe," and it outlined the views of the party and the rights that Black People should have in America, but are denied. The program was structured similarly to the United States Constitution and the Bill of Rights. The initial tactic of the party utilized contemporary open-carry gun laws to protect Party members when ‘policing the police.’ Following officers helped to document brutality at the hands of officers that went unreported by the authorities and protect Black communities from commonplace violence. The Panthers followed the California law that permitted carrying a loaded rifle or shotgun as long as it was publicly displayed and pointed at no one.

On April 1, 1967, a Black unarmed 22-year-old named Denzil Dowell was shot by the police in North Richmond. Dowell's family contacted the Black Panther Party for assistance after county officials refused to investigate the case. The Party held rallies in North Richmond that educated the community on armed self-defense and the Dowell incident. The Party's ideals resonated with several community members, who then brought their own guns to the next rallies. Similarly to the events in 1967, in recent times, Black Lives Matter protests against police brutality erupted in 2020 across many countries following the murder of George Floyd by police officer Derek Chauvin. However, nationwide protests have declined since then. While the physical act of protesting in the streets is an important aspect of activism, the organizing and tactics employed by the Panthers to shock and educate the public were greatly effective in building and maintaining momentum. As the fight against police brutality continues, activists must take more creative approaches in organizing supporters to assemble a long-standing movement that isn’t a blip in the public consciousness, but instead is a call for radical change being constantly pushed by the people. The Dowell case demonstrated how it’s crucial to constantly organize marginalized people in efficient and innovative ways, relating to the people most oppressed, rather than resorting to scattered street protests whose momentum die eventually.

In addition to ‘policing the police,’ local chapters of the Black Panthers also offered community service and aid. They organized a free breakfast program for 20,000 children each day as well as a free food program for families and the elderly. Legal aid offices, clothing distribution, local transportation, and health clinics were just a few of the social initiatives they supported. This aid for low-income communities was crucial in gaining traction for their party and the movement. In nine cities across the U.S., they created Freedom Schools including the Intercommunal Youth Institute and the Oakland Community School. These schools mixed traditional subjects with teachings about Black history and racial inequity, a type of education that many schools did not offer. Likewise, in the past couple of years due to COVID-19, many communities have organized and banded together amidst the pending economic crisis. Networks to help deliver groceries, cover rent, and more have sprung up. In contrast to the typical idea of social activism which paints a picture of shouting protestors marching in the streets, mutual aid does not usually receive the spotlight when discussions of activism arise, but has always been crucial in bolstering low-income marginalized communities. Today, the People’s Survival Program serves as an example of the legacy of the Panthers. Situated in Jacksonville, Florida, it was created in 2017, priding itself on collecting food donations, educating those in need of social services, and making requests for bodycam footage of police.

One of the core principles of the Black Panther Party was tying the struggle for racial justice with the struggle against capitalism by championing solidarity with other marginalized groups. “We want an end to the robbery by the capitalists of our black and oppressed communities” stated the third demand of the Ten Point Program. “The ruling class and their running dogs…” Bobby Seale wrote. “These are the ones who help to maintain and aid the power structure by perpetuating their racist attitudes and using racism as a means to divide the people.” Solidarity with marginalized people against the ruling class of the United States who exploited the labor of the working class was one of the Panther’s focuses. Newton’s chapter in Chicago especially developed support for poor white organizations and Puerto Rican groups by creating the Rainbow Coalition focused on their shared class oppression. In addition to unity with groups nationwide, the Panthers supported the Vietnamese against U.S. imperialism and were heavily opposed to the Vietnam War, saying, “We believe that Black people should not be forced to fight in the military service to defend a racist government that does not protect us. We will not fight and kill other people of color in the world who, like Black people, are being victimized by the White racist government of America.” In addition, Huey Newton issued a statement on behalf of the Black Panther Party in 1970 attacking homophobia and announcing his support for queer people at a time when American  government and society refused to recognize their existence. Huey and Bobby noticed the waycapitalism abusedmarginalized groups and the way racialized American capitalism, built off hundreds of years of slavery and violence, oppressed Black people in America and colonized peoples internationally.

Police brutality is still widely prevalent 60 years later with 266 Black people being killed in 2021 by police officers. Anti-trans legislation is being passed in Idaho criminalizing gender-affirming medical care for trans youth. The wealth gap between America’s richest and poorer families more than doubled from 1989 to 2016. Oxfam reports that from March 18 to the end of 2020, global billionaire wealth increased by $3.9 trillion. However, global workers’ combined earnings fell by $3.7 trillion, according to the International Labor Organization, as millions lost their jobs around the world due to the pandemic.

The Black Panther Party has a longstanding legacy of resistance against police brutality, mutual aid, and anti-capitalist solidarity with other marginalized groups. Even though the Panthers were revolutionary, they were not faultless and their mistakes can become valuable lessons. In Revolutionary Suicide, Huey Newton said, “we were looked upon as an ad-hoc military group, acting outside the community fabric and too radical to be part of it. We saw ourselves as the revolutionary vanguard and did not fully understand that only the people can create the revolution. And hence the people did not follow our lead…” While notable for their solidarity, the Black Panthers did not fully agitate the marginalized into defending themselves. Mass protests and strikes, organized by the people themselves, are crucial to radical change. In the current climate, it’s important to incite the people to defend themselves on a large scale and give them the confidence to lead the movements that will cause more radical change. “By giving all to the present we reject fear, despair, and defeat,” Huey describes the principle of the Panthers in Revolutionary Suicide. “We work to repair the breaches of the past. We strive to carry out the revolutionary principle of transformation, and through long struggle, in Camus’s words, “to remake the soul of our time.”
