---
layout: post
title: "A Cybersecurity Crisis"
author: "Angie Feng"
feature_image: /cogito-xii-pictures/feng.jpeg
categories:
  - Cogito XII
  - Articles
---
In 2007, a study led by Michael Cukier, an assistant professor at the Clark School of the University of Maryland, calculated the average rate of cyberattacks by hackers on internet-accessible computers to be every 36 seconds in the United States. Since then, cyberattacks have become more frequent, with the number of cybersecurity breaches increasing by more than 68% from 2020 to 2021, beating the previous record by over 23%. The rise of cyberattacks has presented several difficulties to the United States national defense systems, as outdated security measures are forced to try and keep up with the rapid pace of technological development. With the increase in reliance upon technology, cyberattacks by hackers have become more impactful and disastrous than ever before. Thus, ensuring the nation’s cybersecurity and protecting civilian rights to data privacy should be a constant priority for national security.

Massive cyberattacks such as the Equifax data breach of 2007 could have easily been prevented, occurring due to negligence to cybersecurity protection. While American citizens responded to this attack optimistically, hoping it would spark stricter data privacy regulations, the government fell short of expectations by taking minimal steps forward in terms of cybersecurity policy. Additionally, attacks using identical exploitations of vulnerabilities continue to occur despite supposed fixing. In 2021, a series of attacks using the log4j exposure reappeared under the leadership of a Chinese hacker group known as “HAFNIUM.” Log4j has been the root of countless cyberattacks, and the government takes preventative measures after each significant breach. However, these vague regulations proved ineffective with each reappearance of a pre-existing vulnerability exploitation. The United States legislation on cybersecurity remains excessively specific towards each cybersecurity breach to which it responds. The government refrains from wholly preventing computer viruses and hacking initiatives while cyberwarfare develops across the globe. The United States has continuously vowed to uphold computer security but fail to adequately protect data stored on the internet with overly specific or vague legislation. The government remains hesitant to fully act upon these measures out of a desire to harness these threats and abilities for national interest.

#### A Timeline of Cybersecurity

The uptick of information and data stored online increased the value of protecting electronic files and the number of hackers seeking to steal web-based information with malicious intent. The term “cybersecurity” was not coined until 1988, and its definition includes any actions taken against unwarranted entry or attack to secure a computer or computer system. However, data privacy and cybersecurity threats existed long before becoming an official term. The 1980s marked a turning point in using malware and hacking for cybercrime purposes rather than academic and research aims. Those more knowledgeable in computer science utilized their skills for financial gain by obtaining private information stored online, selling and using this data for threats. In 1986, a German citizen named Markus Hess sold top secret information concerning the United States military to the Soviet Union Committee for State Security for $54,000. Hess hacked into American military and other industrial networks through an attack from a computer in the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. Hess attacked “about 450 computers and successfully enter[ed] more than 30.” Using the computer in the laboratory as a hub to connect with others, Hess could remotely affect countless US-based computers, a majority of which belonged to the military. Furthermore, Hess’s hacking techniques were unremarkable, using “known security holes and subtle bugs in different operating systems, including UNIX®, VMS®, VM-TSO®, EMBOS®, and SAIL-WAITS®” Hess took advantage of previously discovered and documented methods which should have been fixed. His attacks exposed the vulnerability of storing data online, displayed the dangers of ignoring cybersecurity, and most importantly, illustrated the significance of data privacy and cybersecurity.

As Americans became more knowledgeable on computer science, a new era of computer worms and viruses arose that utilized the ability of code to multiply and spread rapidly. Computer worms and viruses are designed to thrive by creating copies of themselves to propagate. They allow remote hackers to gain control of devices by replicating information, deleting files, sending emails and messages, and linking themselves to other files. However, while a computer virus must be connected to another computer program, a computer worm can work independently without needing a software host to exist and reproduce. In 1988, a program created by Robert T. Morris to gauge the size of the internet through determining the number of internet connections in UNIX systems accidentally became the first computer worm. The Morris worm affected countless Americans after a programming error caused the worm to disseminate beyond its intended scope. The event left victims of the worm deeply worried and concerned: “‘We are currently under attack,’ wrote a concerned student at the University of California, Berkeley in an email later that night.’” With roughly 6,000 computers out of 60,000 connected to the internet affected in under just 24 hours, the world had never before experienced such a powerful and fast-spreading computer virus. Morris’ experimentation uncovered new capabilities of hacking, and “computer experts estimated that the time computers were down and the labor needed to combat the worm cost $5 million to $12 million.” The incident left computer users more aware of the widely destructive impacts of computers if misused and made computer science researchers take cybersecurity much more seriously. The Morris worm also unintentionally inspired a new wave of hackers as computer worms became popularized, sparking an abrupt rise in the antivirus industry which focused on creating software preventing and mitigating computer viruses and worms.  

Moving into the 2000s, organized cybercrime groups and other hacker groups which launched various specific cyberattacks emerged. With hackers gathering together virtually and in person to collaborate on carefully planned attacks, cybercrime became more widespread, dangerous, and accessible. The hacker group Anonymous, formed in 2003, was one of the first well-known hacker groups that organized cyberattack campaigns. The diverse group currently consists of roughly 1,000 members made up of civilians worldwide of different ages, political beliefs, races, and genders. Members of Anonymous identified themselves with profile graphics on websites and online forums, with their faces always disguised in masks. In 2015, a Youtube video displayed a masked Anonymous member warning citizens across the globe to “expect massive cyberattacks. War is declared. Get prepared. Anonymous from all over the world will hunt you down.” Anonymous demonstrated the easy ability to conceal one’s identity on the internet, showing the appeal and popularity of cyberattacks among hackers who wish to leave a great impact on their actions and reduce their risk. With its popularity and many members, Anonymous accomplished what no individual hacker could achieve on their own. Their most infamous tool, the Low Orbit Ion Cannon, or LOIC, lies at the root of several of their attacks. An application to clog servers using test traffic, the LOIC is practical. “When enough people download LOIC and point it at the same target, they create what is in essence a voluntary botnet, capable of taking down a server.” With hacker groups like Anonymous rising in popularity, collaborative hacking and cyberattacks became more prevalent and powerful. Successful hacker groups, such as Anonymous, inspired and motivated other hackers to join or create groups to execute large-scale attacks requiring more involvement, thus creating more damage.

Since then, cyberattacks have evolved to become more directed and financially motivated. The ever-growing reliance upon computers and other technological devices to store information has led to more cyberattacks, due to a tactical shift away from stealing large amounts of individual user data. More cybercriminals have begun utilizing ransomware and phishing attacks to target specific companies with stolen credentials such as login information. Not only are these attacks simpler and easily automated, but they generate higher amounts of revenue for hackers with minimal effort and creativity. Despite the abundance of available knowledge on preventative measures and solutions to these old-fashioned cyber adversaries, they continue to be effective. As put by Jonathan L. Darby, the deputy chief of NSA’s cybersecurity operations group, “I’m still astounded that people fall for the oldest trick in the book, but it works.” This simplicity opens the door for less-experienced hackers to build a career off of exploiting these basic cyberattack strategies that can be more cost-effective than developing a new, sophisticated tactic that risks failing. In 2020, the average ransomware payout was $233,000 per event, compared to less than $10,000 per event in 2018. Due to an overarching ignorance of companies towards cybersecurity, hackers have reverted to basic, easily preventable cyberattack tactics that earn them increasingly large sums of money. Cybersecurity is one of the nation’s most pressing issues, yet, citizens continue to neglect its importance due to a lack of knowledge on the new and rapidly changing subject.

#### Stuxnet

Since the creation of Stuxnet, the world’s first cyberweapon, the United States has furtively continued to develop cyberweapons for purposes of national security, as the idea of cyberwarfare becomes a looming threat to the nation. Stuxnet, the name of the sophisticated malware used to target Iran’s nuclear program from 2007 until its discovery in 2010 after a programming error allowed it to spread beyond Iranian machines, marked a turning point for the United States’ involvement in cyberwarfare and digital weaponry. First unleashed under the Bush administration, the computer worm attacked “centrifuges at Iran’s uranium enrichment facility outside Natanz, Iran” by manipulating “valves on the centrifuges, increasing and decreasing their speed, putting additional pressure on them, and ultimately damaging the machines until they no longer functioned.” Stuxnet temporarily deactivated nearly one-fifth of Iranian centrifuges working to purify uranium to produce nuclear weaponry. While the creators of Stuxnet have yet to be officially confirmed, anonymous United States officials who worked under Obama’s guidance throughout the campaign have claimed responsibility for it. This would make Stuxnet the first major instance of a government-led cyberattack of such magnitude that could only be achieved otherwise through bombings and the deployment of United States troops in Iran. Cyberweaponry presented United States armed forces with remote security while inflicting real damage for its targets. Under Bush and Obama’s presidencies, the United States began to leverage this new strategy for dealing with international affairs that utilized hacking in a purposely harmful manner, known as cyberwarfare.

Through the success of Stuxnet, the United States has continued to increase its development of cyber weaponry at the risk of endangering the country’s insufficient cybersecurity. Stuxnet proved effective in imposing United States power onto Iranian facilities to inhibit nuclear weapon production, displaying a new form of warfare to the international community, one that could perhaps come back to haunt the United States. During his presidency, Obama raised a prominent fear of using hacking as a weapon as a country whose infrastructure relies heavily upon computer systems, rendering it particularly vulnerable to cyberattack. Nevertheless, the United States armed forces have taken several recent strides to further research and implement cyberwarfare. In 2014, “the first new Army branch since Special Forces was created in 1987” was dedicated to cyber. In April of 2015, the Department of Defense released a document detailing the nation’s cyber offense goals. However, this report continued the precedent for vague cybersecurity legislation, leaving questions regarding when, how, and where the government planned to implement these capabilities. The nation takes an offensive stance on cybersecurity policy focused on advancing cyberwarfare instead of defending the nation’s digital privacy, driven by a hope to increase America’s global power through these innovative and powerful technologies.

#### Equifax

On September 7, 2017, one of the country’s largest credit reporting agencies encountered a data breach that stole the Personally Identifiable Information (PII)—including social security numbers, addresses, birth dates, and driver’s license numbers—of countless Americans and other customers across the globe. The hack exploited “a web server vulnerability in Apache Struts that it failed to patch months ago” and “affected 143 million consumers.” The Apache Struts CVE-2017-5638 was a vulnerability that had been previously located by the Department of Homeland Securities (DHS) and updated accordingly. However, Equifax did not follow these recommendations advised by the DHS, and hackers took advantage of their ignorance. Equifax could have easily been prevented, but the company disregarded the government’s suggestions. This event demonstrated the importance of abiding by the guidance of government-appointed officials dedicated to researching cybersecurity, and proved the vast magnitude of people that just one vulnerability can affect.

Many hoped that the Equifax breach would have an optimistic impact on US policy regarding cybersecurity. However, the United States only passed ineffective legislation and official statements with vague wording, failing to hold Equifax accountable for its disastrous mistake. Following the hack, the Government Accountability Office released a report on actions taken by the government in response to the Equifax breach and another detailing a need for “better oversight of consumer reporting agencies.” In the first report, the government acknowledged the recommendations that federal agencies reiterated on the urgency of updating the software that caused the breach, but found that “Equifax did not ask the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)...to assist in responding to the breach.” During the hack period, only Equifax was aware of the breach. Yet, they deliberately chose not to inform the government or the public and allowed it to grow exponentially. Thus, while the “IRS and SSA made changes to contracts they had with Equifax to require prompt notification of any future breach,” the new regulations extended only to Equifax and no other companies. Nothing ensured that the well-researched DHS recommendations or research was implemented, which gave companies such as Equifax the latitude to save money and time by ignoring important updates and software corrections.

Additionally, the government made minimal efforts to implement legislation preventing further large-scale cyberattacks. One significant contributor to the magnitude of the Equifax breach was the lack of regulation surrounding breach notifications. National breach notifications are required under the law when a significant data breach occurs. However besides their mandate, all other breach notification details are malleable. Companies can personalize their breach notifications, and in many instances, “consequences and risks of the data breach were usually obfuscated by hedge terms such as ‘potentially’ and ‘may,’ as well as a ‘no evidence’ statement (e,g. “We have found no evidence indicating that your breached personal data has been misused”).” Important details and information regarding the next steps to take for victims of the breach are often buried within long paragraphs and confusing language, and readers struggle to “navigate and prioritize listed actions.” This flexibility allowed Equifax to release its breach notification many days after the hack and customize its notifications in the company’s interest. Directly after the incident, “Congress appeared poised to create a national breach notification law governing how and how quickly companies must notify anybody whose personal information is stolen in a breach.” However, no such law passed, and the government took no concrete steps towards better protecting cybersecurity after such a prevalent hack.

After less than two years of investigation and discussion, the government dropped most of its few plans to hold Equifax accountable for its poor cybersecurity practices and insufficient response to the breach. Despite its blatant disregard for the countless DHS recommendations on solving the Apache Strut vulnerability, “neither the Federal Trade Commission nor the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has taken any steps yet to fine Equifax or force it to ramp up its security moving forward.” Just a few months later, “in February, the CFPB wound down its investigation of the breach.” While the United States government still has the opportunity to take action against Equifax now, several years have already passed since the breach. Countless government officials have expressed discontent with the situation, including Senator Mark Warner of Virginia, who wrote in a post following the Equifax hack that “the Administration could also stand up for consumers by actually holding Equifax accountable…but doing nothing at all is just unacceptable.” Arguably the most expansive data breach in United States history, Equifax occurred due to a lack of government oversight and regulation regarding cybersecurity. The government neglected to hold the company accountable and implement future preventative data protection measures.

#### The Log4j Vulnerability

On December 9, 2021, Alibaba Cloud Security Team’s Chen Zhaojun discovered and released code for a vulnerability in one of the most popular Java logging utilities known as Log4j. Created by volunteers at the Apache Software Foundation, Log4j is a free, open-source software that serves as a logging library for software developers to troubleshoot bugs and track data within their code. This library was traced across countless favorite platforms such as Apple’s macOS, Linux, Microsoft, and Amazon Web Services and was also found to have been downloaded over 400,000 times. The kids’ video game Minecraft was one of the first companies to discover the vulnerability, notifying their users on their website and immediately releasing a patch. Shortly after, hackers realized the prevalence of the exposure in countless other websites and applications, thus initiating a stream of cyberattacks exploiting the Log4j flaw, to later be known as Log4Shell. In roughly a week, despite several efforts of cybersecurity experts to patch flaws and defend against attacks, the number of exploitations of the vulnerability exploded to over 1.8 million attempts.

The Hafnium attacks were one of the several cyberattacks that leveraged the newfound Log4Shell, occurring less than a week after the vulnerability was first disclosed and targeting countless United States organizations. This hacking campaign, led by a Chinese hacking group known as “Hafnium'' exploited the Log4j vulnerability embedded into the software of Microsoft. Hafnium, a familiar face for Microsoft, after having previously attacked over 30,000 United States companies using a flaw in Microsoft’s Exchange emailing platform, stole private data and information from American companies through cybersecurity holes caused by Log4j. In Microsoft’s released report on the attacks and recommendations for its victims, they found that Hafnium operators utilized “the vulnerability to attack virtualization infrastructure to extend their typical targeting.” With Log4j, Hafnium expanded its hacking capabilities beyond just Microsoft users by using the connected infrastructure between Microsoft and several other companies. These attacks further highlighted the disastrous effects that cyberattacks can cause and gave the United States a better understanding of the destructive potential of computers if misused. Log4j demonstrated the permanence of software and the nation’s difficulty and lack of knowledge regarding cybersecurity. It created a greater sense of urgency to secure data and mitigate threats to cybersecurity.
Following the attacks, the government took several immediate steps to address the widespread attacks and advise those affected. However, the regulations pertained to just companies whose vulnerabilities had already been discovered, allowing hidden vulnerabilities the comfort of negligence. On December 17, 2021, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency issued emergency directive 22-02, titled “Mitigate Apache Log4j Vulnerability.” This directive required “federal civilian departments and agencies to immediately patch their systems or implement appropriate mitigation measures” by 5 pm on December 23, 2021. Additionally, the agency launched a website dedicated to the vulnerability, consisting of recommendations for patching information and technical details. While this worked to assist companies whose vulnerabilities had already been exploited, it failed to address the ubiquity of the flaw. It was found that “one in ten of nearly every aspect of our digital infrastructure has the potential for malicious exploitation via Log4Shell.” By December 22, 2021, “a disturbing 30% of organizations haven’t even begun looking for this bug.” By enforcing only known exploitations to take CISA measures for mitigation, the government neglected the potential for countless undiscovered vulnerabilities that could be attacked at any given moment. While the government developed a robust course of action for affected devices and software, it missed the crucial need to identify locations of the vulnerability as the prevalence of Log4Shell allowed several iterations of it to remain hidden.

#### Conclusion

Although the United States has timelessly worked to increase the nation’s defense security, its policy surrounding cybersecurity remains vague due to its novelty and the nation’s hesitancy to fully restrict cyber capabilities for military and federal agency usage. The lack of mitigation measures taken by the government following massive cyberattacks and cybersecurity breaches, including Equifax and Log4j, demonstrates an undeniable reluctance to pass strong legislation to prevent future threats. Despite dedicated research and coding to patch vulnerabilities, there remain no restrictions to enforce the implementation and installation of these well-planned recommendations and updates. As the government authorizes federal hacking campaigns and furthers the advancement of cyber offense strategies utilizing hacking to target international threats, it becomes clear that the nation refuses to protect cybersecurity to the best of its abilities.

This trade-off has been emphasized in the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine as Biden discusses various options for large-scale cyberattacks created to interfere with Russian military operations against Ukraine. These campaigns would be of a greater magnitude than ever seen before, with powers of “disrupting internet connectivity across Russia, shutting off electric power, and tampering with railroad switches to hamper Russia’s ability to resupply its forces.” While the capabilities of these strategies are significant, so are the risks. As put by Kim Zetter, cybersecurity journalist and award-winning author, unleashing such powerful cyberattacks is akin to “a stone thrown by people who live in a glass house.” When launching a cyber weapon, the target is both harmed and obtains the intellectual property by which it was created, offering it the ability to relaunch the weapon back at the offender. As a nation that relies so heavily upon computer systems, the country must prioritize data privacy preservation. However, the government repeatedly chooses to put the digital security of its citizens at risk through its lack of robust cybersecurity policy for the advancement of cyberwarfare operations. With the rise of cyberattacks across the globe, the United States must focus primarily on defending cybersecurity before threats occur rather than only taking action reactively. In turn, the country will be able to implement cyberweaponry more safely and effectively with a reduced potential for its technology backfiring against civilians.
