---
layout: post
title: "Recipe for Stability: Putin’s Power Base"
author: "Simon Juknelis"
feature_image: /cogito-xii-pictures/juknelis.jpeg
categories:
- Cogito-XII
- Articles
---
On February 24, 2022, the largest military mobilization in Europe since World War II began. With Russian President Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, protests have sprung up in cities across Russia. They have given weight to the idea that this invasion might end with the upheaval of Putin’s regime and the end of his 24-year career as the head of Russian politics. However, Putin has built an extremely strong base of power that would be difficult to topple for any potential rebel group. He controls the citizenry through his power over the media, and he can assert his power over the newly empowered class of ruling elites that he created.

One of the key stabilizing factors of Putin’s regime is his absolute control over the media. While  the Internet and social media have gained ground in the Russian news industry over the last few years, 72% of Russians still rely on television as their primary news source. Therefore, to control information in Russia, one must control television. This is what Putin strove to achieve when, almost immediately after becoming president, he directed his police forces to storm the headquarters of NTV, one of the few remaining independent news agencies in the country. The government claimed that it was carrying out debt collection against NTV’s owner. However, on several occasions NTV had attacked Russian military actions in Chechnya, a region of Russia known for its rebellion against the central government. The very day that the NTV buildings were stormed, Putin unexpectedly traveled to Chechnya. In the end, NTV fell into the hands of the government-owned gas company Gazprom; all four major television broadcasters were then under the control of the Russian state. However, using force to control the media can be a risky move for Putin. This was shown when, in 1993, an attack on the Ostankino Television Center left 69 dead. Even when NTV was actively being seized, a number of journalists remained in the building and tried to prevent the police from coming in, creating a possibility for violence.

In recent years, Putin has taken less direct approaches toward influencing independent broadcasters as well as the outside parties who might support them. In 2014, a news agency known as TV Dozhd, which commonly reported on corruption and protests in Russia to a viewership of about 12 million, was suddenly kicked off of cable packages offered by several nominally-independent private telecom companies. Soon enough, TV Dozhd was evicted from its offices and could not find a single business-space landlord in the entire city of Moscow who would rent to them. It was forced to set up operations in an apartment and its audience was  cut in half. No explicit government edict was ever issued ordering TV Dozhd shut down; private parties simply shunned TV Dozhd out of fear that if they did not comply, the same would be done to them. Putin has established a system that ensures his control over public information without him even having to do anything, and with this control, he sets the narrative for all Russian politics.

Putin has also secured his hold on power by empowering a new class of politicians loyal to him. Before the collapse of the Soviet Union, Putin worked as a spy for the KGB. This makes him part of a group known of former spies and military officials as the “siloviki.” During his tenure, Putin has transformed many siloviki into oligarchs, elevating them to positions of high power and extreme wealth which many, if not most, of them had never held before. This group of politicians has only Putin to thank for their political and financial standing; in this, Putin has created an elite class that will almost always side with him over any rebel leader. Moreover, the siloviki tend to support “individual survival with a view to the Kremlin” over “the defense of common [oligarch] interests.” This further supports Putin’s position; the most powerful people in Russia have been successfully split into factions vying for favor with the current government rather than overthrowing it and taking direct control. Not only do the siloviki maintain Putin’s standing, but they use their own resources to actively support him in his political efforts. In 2014, Russian oil company Lukoil paid off a $1.4 million fine on behalf of an economic advisor to the president of the Czech Republic. Shortly after this occurred, Russia invaded and annexed Crimea, and the West imposed sanctions on Russia. The Czech president has since become one of the most outspoken critics of these sanctions in Europe, denying that any Russian troops had entered Ukraine. The Russian oligarchs in charge of Lukoil were willing to spend their own money in order to support Putin’s agenda. By creating a new elite class and keeping them divided and fighting for his approval, Putin further guaranteed the stability of his government.

When discussing how the U.S. and E.U. can attack Putin without provoking a nuclear war, one suggestion that frequently comes up is overthrowing him from the inside and installing a more democratic leader. This seems like a feasible option as social media grows in popularity in Russia, fighting Putin’s media control, and sanctions work to fight Putin’s control over his wealthy upper class. However, Putin has taken action with Internet censorship laws to prevent the spread of social media, and as the recent major uptick in gas prices in the U.S. has shown, sanctions hurt the sanctioner as well as the sanctioned. Destroying Putin’s base of power may be one of the only ways of taking him down, but to do so will require a major, concerted effort that, even in success, will cost Western nations.
