---
layout: post
title: "Centuries-Old Colonialism Found to Be Affecting the Present Climate Crisis"
author: "Arthi Vithiananthan"
feature_image: /cogito-xii-pictures/vithiananthan.jpeg
categories:
- Cogito-XII
- Articles
---
In March 2020, a global pandemic put trade on hold, and experts were hopeful that the decline in transportation would help with climate change. A year later, the World Meteorological Organization’s State of the Global Climate report stated that temperatures were 1.2°C above pre-industrial levels worldwide. This may not seem like an alarming increase to most. However in 2018, policymakers were warned to limit worldwide temperatures to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, or else there would be irreversible consequences. These natural disasters are wrecking undeveloped countries, which collectively contribute less than 1 percent of global carbon emissions but are still the most affected by disasters created by climate change. What can the world blame for all of these issues? The answer is clear: colonialism and its foundational lack of empathy for the Earth is the root of our climate crisis.

Historically, indigenous cultures have taken care of their homelands, as they survived in the same areas for centuries. However, when European colonizers began to explore the world, the main goal was to improve European economic prospects, ultimately at the expense of the native people in the area. These selfish conquests led to the degradation of the soil, culture, and people in the colonized regions. While Europeans extracted resources, sustainable practices to protect the environment were abandoned. Colonizers began to implement their customs in new climates, which ended up further harming the people in the area.

For instance, modern research shows that the climate of the Caribbean islands has changed through the islands’ history of colonization. Before colonization, inhabitants would use easily accessible materials such as wood and lightweight thatch. These materials made resilient homes to withstand the intense hurricanes the islands face, which have only become more frequent and dangerous with climate change. However, after these countries were colonized, Europeans forced their methods of household architecture onto the islanders. Now houses are made of concrete, which is not locally obtainable, and the houses cannot withstand hurricanes. Since the houses toppled so frequently, people have difficulty rebuilding after these natural disasters.

Likewise, resources in Africa have been exploited at the expense of the native people. In Madagascar, resources such as its forests have been destroyed by the Europeans for profit. The descendants of the indigenous people, whose ancestors used to live well off of the land, now are forced to live in areas that are wrecked from soil degradation, erosion, and deforestation. This mistreatment puts these innocent people at risk of the dire effects of climate change. In the Central African Republic, the Mandja people were forced to stop hunting by the Europeans and instead had to work on cotton plantations. The plantations systems created by European colonizers took priority over subsistence agriculture, which affected the conditions of living altogether.

Due to these terrible acts, no apology will lessen the transgressions caused by European colonization. Instead, we need concrete next steps from governments and policymakers to pay for their past actions and save the Earth. This should include measures such as land reparations, indigenous decision-making, and sustained financing. Land reparations would allow indigenous people to reclaim their territories and rebuild the systems they initially used to care for their environment. Indigenous ownership over their homelands will not only increase native access to culturally important resources—such as traditional food and sacred areas—but also encourage collaboration with indigenous groups to repair the Earth and our climate. Similarly, indigenous decision-making will help native communities implement environmental changes to their practices. Throughout history, indigenous people have modeled incredible systems to take care of their land. Returning the power of decision-making about indigenous territories would ensure that the ruined Earth would be responsive to necessary environmental improvements. Lastly, sustained financing for native-led programs, such as land stewardship initiatives, would allow significant advancement toward sustainability. Indigenous people would have total control over where funding is spent, creating opportunities such as stability in careers and communal assets. After all of the horrible actions committed against indigenous communities, it is impossible to have a truthful conversation about climate change without acknowledging colonialism’s effects on the current environment. But as the world takes steps toward building a better future, it is reassuring that indigenous people are beginning to reclaim aspects of their cultures that they lost over the past centuries, while simultaneously helping improve our climate and foster sustainability.
