---
layout: post
title: "Congress’ Crooked Customs: Examining the Legitimacy of the 1957 Civil Rights Filibuster"
author: "Corban Shih"
feature_image: /cogito-xii-pictures/shih.jpeg
categories:
- Cogito XII
- Articles
---
On August 28, 1957, South Carolina Senator Strom Thurmond made his way to the Senate gym to take a lengthy spell in the sauna. Although seemingly mundane, other senators were aware of his intentions: Thurmond’s drawn-out trip meant he was preparing his body for a filibuster. The heavy perspiration created by the dry heat dehydrated Thurmond to such an extent that he lost a substantial amount of water weight. As bathroom breaks are not protected by senate procedure, Thurmond’s body would have to soak up water like a sponge as he sipped from his pitcher of water. Thurmond’s infamous filibuster would last a total of 24 hours and 18 minutes, shattering all records previously held by his Southern comrades.
The filibuster is a powerful tool employed by senators by speaking for numerous consecutive hours on end. By disgracing the country’s founding principles and undermining the fundamental majority rule of the nation, filibusters such as Thurmond’s 1957 performance dangerously violate the boundaries of Senate procedure. They are also egregious obstructions of democracy, as evidenced by their non-deliberative and corrupt nature. The culmination of racist rhetoric and obstructionist resolve of the 1957 Civil Rights filibuster are what cement the Civil Rights filibuster’s place in history as an illegitimate attempt to subvert democracy.

First and foremost, the Senate filibuster is a clear violation of the founding principles of the United States and the American system of government. Rules of extended speech in the Senate were not outlined anywhere in the Constitution, leading to many conflicting interpretations of acceptable procedure in the Senate. Without any explicit mention of the filibuster in the Constitution, it is important to instead examine the politics of the Constitutional Framers. When founding the nation, political titans such as Alexander Hamilton and James Madison diametrically opposed the notion of countermajoritarian measures in American legislative bodies. In Hamilton’s 1787 Federalist Paper No. 22, he wrote that giving “a minority a negative upon the majority… is to embarrass the administration, to destroy the energy of the government, and to substitute the pleasure, caprice, or artifices of an insignificant, turbulent, or corrupt junto, to the regular deliberations and decisions of a respectable majority.” Federalists and Democratic-Republicans agreed that empowering the minority at the expense of the majority would take a severe toll on the body’s ability to act and deliberate effectively. Madison wrote, “It would be no longer the majority that would rule: the power would be transferred to the minority. Were the defensive privilege limited to particular cases, an interested minority might take advantage of it to screen themselves from equitable sacrifices to the general weal, or, in particular emergencies, to extort unreasonable indulgences.” Evidently, the Founding Fathers condemned the prospect of a stubborn minority predominating a quantitatively greater majority.

In the middle of the 20th century, a revolutionary movement advocating for Civil Rights and equality rippled across the nation. As the Civil Rights movement increased in strength, the Civil Rights filibuster too grew in a parallel fashion. The Civil Rights filibuster grew so strong that eventually it proved itself as a deliberate Senate’s greatest adversary.

With countless hours able to be wasted by the will of just a few senators, the filibuster stalls Senate progress to such an extent that Congress is no longer able to serve its primary purpose: passing legislation in an efficient manner. In the example of the 1957 Civil Rights Bill, Southern Senators wasted countless hours while scribes spent thousands of additional government dollars towards keeping the Congressional Record. This was time that could have been used for debating many other pressing matters, or even for drafting a compromised revision of the bill. While it’s now possible to keep a cloture vote on the back burner, this was an option that only came about in recent years. Even so, Southern Democrats often expressed a “determination to prevent the bill from ever reaching a vote.” This would become evident in Thurmond’s 1957 performance, as the speech material was seldom pertinent to the debate at hand. En route to spending a whole day on the Senate floor, Thurmond read the voting laws from all 48 states verbatim, along with the entire Declaration of Independence. Thurmond’s speech was so monotonous and tedious that only three people listened to the entirety of his speech: an NAACP executive, an unidentified man who appeared to be sleeping in a corner, and Thurmond’s wife. Visibly, Southern senators would go to greatly unnecessary and convoluted measures in order to obstruct the Senate’s purpose of serving the country’s collective legislative body.

Furthermore, specific filibusters, such as the effort against the 1957 Civil Rights Bill, can only be seen as a measure to advance unconstitutional practices in the United States. The 1957 bill directly involved the Constitution, as its main provision was to protect the 15th amendment. The 15th amendment reads, “The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.” In 1957, there was no agency to prosecute states or individuals that violated those provisions, and the 1957 Civil Rights Act was meant to provide a solution by establishing a Civil Rights department in the justice system. Many southern states were taking advantage of the lack of federal power by going to extreme measures to strip Black Americans of their Constitutional voting rights. By means of biased literacy tests and poll taxes, Jim Crow laws ensured that Black people in the South could not exercise their right to vote . In Thurmond’s 24 hour filibuster, he posed the question, “Why do we need a Federal law when every State has a statute to protect the right to vote?” While all states technically had protection against voter intimidation written into their constitutions, they were often simply ignored and voting obstructions were permitted to continue. Opposing the enforcement of a Constitutional amendment with such rigor is an inherent declaration of war upon the Constitution, solidifying the 1957 filibuster as an appalling attempt to continue unjust and unfair treatment of Black voters.

Moreover, for much of the 19th and 20th centuries, the political atmosphere was far different from the simple two-party system that is employed today. When debating Civil Rights, blocs were not determined by party lines, but rather, by the Mason-Dixon line. Democrats and Republicans were split into North and South, and Civil Rights bills often found themselves with bipartisan support or opposition. At the 1948 Democratic convention, tensions rose to a maxima when a group of Southern Democrats split from the mainstream party in a protest against popular support of Civil Rights in the North. This group formed their own party called the States’ Rights Party, or familiarly, the Dixiecrats. The Dixiecrats’ central tenet was a firmly rooted belief in the segregation of races, and although they disbanded later in 1948, their presence was still felt as they rejoined the Southern Democrats.

Due to the overlap between the Dixiecrats and the filibustering Southern Democrats, it is likely that the same segregationist ideas were transferred from one medium to the other. As such, while the 1957 filibuster used states’ rights as a front, they were simply segregationist attempts to continue corrupt practices in the United States. Senators who filibustered against Civil Rights claimed that the debate was never over Civil Rights itself, but rather, the federal government overstepping the autonomy of the states. Importantly, the figurehead of the Dixiecrat party (and presidential nominee) was a man who would again become prevalent in the 1957 Civil Rights Act debate: Strom Thurmond. In the States’ Rights Party Platform, the official document distinguishing the political ideology of the party, Thurmond wrote that, “We oppose and condemn the action of the Democratic convention in sponsoring a civil rights program calling for the elimination of segregation, [and] social equality.” Thurmond’s vehement opposition to the mixing of races shows just how unwilling some Southern senators were to accept that a monumental change was occurring in the country. It’s unlikely that Thurmond’s political ideology changed much between 1948 and 1957, as evident by the 1956 Southern Manifesto, of which Thurmond was a chief contributor. The 1956 document, drafted shortly after a monumental decision on Brown v. Board of Education, essentially called for a return to the “separate but equal” doctrine that existed prior to the Supreme Court decision. Known as the “President of the South,” Thurmond’s contributions in drafting this document were crucial, compelling many states to resist the desegregation that the federal government was mandating. While standing firmly in opposition to the 1957 Civil Rights Bill by filibustering, Strom Thurmond asked, “Who is in a better position to protect the right to vote than the officials of the States?” While his argument may seem virtuous, it must be reiterated that Southern states were failing to prosecute practices that prevented people of color from voting. Thurmond was simply attempting to maintain the oppressive status quo, which employed literacy tests and blocked black men from voting. Just as Strom Thurmond was a segregationist who opposed any sort of “social equality by federal fiat,” the filibusters undertaken by Southern senators in 1957 were shallow and stubborn attempts to uphold racist practices in the US.

The  1957 Senate filibuster was a clearcut attempt to unseat democracy by any means necessary in order to further racist Southern ideals. This was and continues to be the very nature of the Civil Rights filibuster: unconstitutional, minoritarian, unprincipled, and obstructionist. At its core, the Civil Rights filibuster issue splinters into a number of greater debates that remain relevant today. The pressing conflicts between  the state and federal government, the House and Senate , and the North and South are all intertwined, and understanding the Civil Rights filibuster of 1957 is instrumental in crucial as the nation continues to debate the filibuster 60 years later. Although the Civil Rights movement is no longer as active as it was sixty years ago, the Senate filibuster still lingers. The question of abolishing the filibuster as a whole looms overhead, and much has been said about it in recent years. In July of 2021, President Joe Biden said eliminating the filibuster would “throw the entire Congress into chaos,” showing just how the path for eradicating the filibuster has a clouded road ahead of it.
