---
layout: post
title: "Enforced Voter Identification: Is it Effective?"
author: "Joanne Lee"
feature_image: /cogito-xii-pictures/lee.png
categories:
  - Cogito-XII
  - Articles
---
In efforts to reshape American elections as part of a broad campaign by the Republicans, a new Texas voting law enforcing voter identification requirements called “Senate Bill 1” was signed into legislation in October by Governor Greg Abbot (R-TX). The new law states that absentee voters must include their driver’s license number, state ID number, or the last four digits of their social security numbers on their voter applications, making the voting process far more difficult for those who utilize mail-in voting. As a result, Texas citizens who prefer to vote by mail have expressed their confusion and concerns as they see their applications for ballots being rejected by local election offices. Recent reports have revealed that 23,000 ballots have been rejected and thrown out, which amounts to approximately 13% of mail ballots uncounted in the March elections across 187 counties in Texas. This statistic is far above what is considered the norm in a general election, as typically anything above 2% is deemed alarming as stated in an article from PBS. Often, mail-in applications are rejected because they do not meet the identification requirements, or the newly required information is mismatched with the data on the state file to verify these voters. These numbers must match their voter file to be approved. Although Republicans claim that these additional voting rules that enforce the ethics of candid identification would seemingly make it “easier to vote and harder to cheat,” this leads to mounting frustration and piles of uncounted votes. The rejection rates were also suspiciously higher in counties that statistically lean more Democratic than Republican. All of these Texas counties are known for their Democratic stronghold. In Harris County, 208 applications were rejected, which is 16% out of their total of 1,276 applications. Travis County also reports that 50% of their approximate 700 applications were rejected. Houston had the highest rejection rate, as 7,000 mail ballots were discarded (about 19%). By contrast, the five counties that Trump won in 2020 had the highest rate of accepted mail-in primary voters. In total, they had a combination of 2,006 rejected mailed ballots, a rate of 10%. The counties that Biden won, on the other hand, had 14,020 rejected ballots, a rate of 15.7%. These statistical reports incites suspicion in regards to the true intentions of this new voting law.

Additionally, these new impositions specifically impact senior citizens who are not yet familiar with other voting methods. According to these new implementations, Texas law outlines that only those who are 65 or older are eligible to receive paper ballots that can be filled out at home and either returned in the mail or dropped off in person on Election Day, a far more restrictive enforcement compared to prior mail-in ballots. In cases that conflict with personal affairs, voters must qualify under a limited set of reasons for their need for a mail-in ballot, such as being located in another country during the election period or a health disability/illness that prohibits them from voting in person. This new legislation is primarily driven by Trump’s baseless claims of prevalent fraud in the election of 2020. The Republican state lawmakers composed the new ID requirements and legalized these new standards as “Senate Bill 1,” a collective effort to protect the election process from potential fraud despite the lack of evidence indicating these actions. However, the soaring numbers of rejected ballots in Texas itself significantly exceed the hundreds of voter fraud cases discovered. While these legislators push to legalize the new voter identification law nation-wide in the US, their endeavors have only succeeded in restricting Texas’s voting process and the diminishment of local control over state elections. In response, this bill has been denounced and faces federal lawsuits by advocates and civil organizations for voters with disabilities or people of color, as it has raised more barriers on top of the existing hurdles against their political involvement.

It is expected that at least 17 other states will eventually cast ballots under stricter election laws. Through a Democratic push for counteraction, rejected voters are able to comply with an additional new voting law that created a correction process for mail-in voting, through identifying errors on their voter applications. The county officials notify voters that their application was rejected and inform them on how to correct this through a new online ballot tracker. Though this does not fully recover the impact of ballot rejection rates, it is evident that the general public is making an effort to counter the dubious reports on election data from this new Texas legislation. These findings raise the question of whether or not this new voter identification law advocated by the Republicans is truly in the best, impartial, political interest of all citizens.
