---
layout: post
title: "Why the Russian Army is Currently Struggling in Ukraine"
author: "Alan Cai"
feature_image: /cogito-xii-pictures/cai.jpeg
categories:
- Cogito XII
- Articles
---
Prior to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, military analysts attempted to predict the outcome of Putin’s potential gamble in Ukraine. When the invasion commenced on February 24th, 2022, military analysts from across the world scrambled to watch the conflict unfold in real-time on social media platforms and cable television. As the events in Ukraine unfolded, there were signs that Russia was struggling to make meaningful gains across the country. Russian soldiers were able to move towards their predetermined axis of advance; however, videos showed Russian soldiers being ambushed and abandoning their tanks. Taking into account documented claims through photographic and video evidence, at the time of writing on March 15th, 2022, Russia had lost upwards of 1,357 military vehicles. However, the actual number is likely higher. Nonetheless, this figure is comparable to the number of Soviet losses during the entire occupation of Afghanistan, in which the Red Army lost 1,461 tanks over nine years. Reports also surfaced describing crumbling Russian morale as Russian troops ran out of fuel and food. Bleak and demoralizing reports for the Russian army less than a month into the invasion has taken many western analysts by surprise as Ukrainian forces have performed much better than expected and Putin’s soldiers flounder in Ukraine. Putin has been facing difficulty in Ukraine due to multiple primary causes. First, Putin has failed to achieve aerial supremacy in the opening stages of his campaign in Ukraine. Moreover, the deep operations tactics of the Russian army have left Russian supply lines overstretched and vulnerable to attacks. Indeed, Russian columns pushed too far into Ukraine without gaining complete control of the invaded areas in their rear. This has left Russian supply lines and infrastructure vulnerable to attack. In addition, Putin heavily miscalculated Ukrainian resistance and allowed himself to be dragged into a conventional war for which he was unprepared, leading to his army struggling embarrassingly against a weaker adversary.

Since the 20th century, Russian military doctrine has stressed the use of the Deep Battle or Deep Operation doctrine. Soviet military planners called for an offensive doctrine that would take advantage of a large frontline with multiple axes of advance. The Deep Battle doctrine required several waves of attacks. Most of the soldiers in an operational detachment would be held in reserve. They would wait for the first wave of the attack to probe for any weak spots in their enemy's defenses and then launch into the attack only at the weakest points of the enemies defenses. Soviet troops would take advantage of weak spots to infiltrate the rear of their enemy, moving towards predetermined targets; usually military infrastructure like airports, staging grounds, supply depots, etc. This strategy allowed for the Soviet Army to bypass and envelop large enemy formations and punch deep into enemy territory, causing heavy damage to the opponent's military infrastructure and equipment reserves. This strategy had been employed​​ by the Russian army in numerous conflicts prior to the Invasion of Ukraine. Notably, in WWII during Operation Bagration, the Deep Operations strategy helped drive the German troops out of much of modern-day Ukraine, Belorussia, and the Baltic States in 1944. Deep offensive tactics during Operation Bagration may have been responsible for up to one million casualties for the German Army, solely in Ukraine.

The Russian army has also implemented Deep Battle tactics against Ukrainian troops during their current invasion of Ukraine. Notably, prior to the invasion of Ukraine, much of the 1st Guards Tank Army was deployed to the northern Ukrainian border. The 1st Guards Army is one of the preeminent formations in the Russian Army, and is used as a shock unit, specializing in “Exploitation in Deep Operations”. When the invasion of Ukraine commenced and Russian troops poured into Ukraine, as per their doctrine, they left thousands of Ukrainian soldiers behind their frontline and advanced along the weakest points in the Ukrainian defenses. However, the Ukrainian soldiers that were enveloped in pockets behind the front were able to conduct limited operations and attacks on rear elements of the Russian army. In particular, Ukrainian forces left behind the rapidly advancing Russian spearhead have been able to launch devastating attacks on unarmed Russian supply convoys and rear-guard elements of the Russian army, which have drastically slowed the Russian advance and caused fuel and supply shortages for the frontline units of the Russian military.

Furthermore, as Russian soldiers penetrated deeper into Ukraine, their supply lines became overstretched because Russian military planners had not counted on a protracted conflict with Ukraine. Russian supply missions had simply not allocated enough equipment to resupply their frontline units, as the Russian Military Command had underestimated Ukrainian resistance. According to Katherine Lawlor, an analyst at the Institute for the Study of War, “​​Russia ‘likely counted on the shock of its invasion to rapidly overwhelm Ukraine’s defenses.’” Russian soldiers didn’t adequately supply themselves as they advanced into Ukraine, as they believed that “they’d go into Ukraine ‘so fast’ that they’d then be able to ‘go back to their supply in Russia’ and push forward things like food, ammo, and equipment.” However, this hasn’t been the case, and Russian forces are stuck in Ukraine fighting a protracted conflict without proper sustenance and equipment. As the war dragged into its second week, reports came out of Russian soldiers eating expired food from 2015, and stuck Russian tankers visiting Ukrainian civilians for fuel. The Ukrainian Ministry of Defense even asked civilians to sabotage Russian fuel supplies by adding sugar to their fuel before giving it to Russian soldiers. The supply situation got so desperate for the Russian army that many Russian units simply deserted or fled, and many commanders abandoned their equipment as they could not effectively repair or maintain it after breaking down. The Russian invasion of Ukraine has been a disaster in terms of logistics, and Russian forces have been severely limited by their lack of adequate logistics and resupply systems.

Furthermore, Russian forces have found it difficult to advance without air superiority. During the US Invasion of Iraq in 2003, the United States Air Force (USAF) and other allied air forces spent a lot of time before the invasion flying sorties against Iraqi air defenses. This meant that during the invasion itself, American aviation could operate freely across Iraq, hitting supply lines, convoys, key targets, military industry, and performing air support operations for ground forces. According to General John Jumper, the Chief of Staff of the USAF during the Invasion of Iraq, “[The USAF] started our work in the air component back in June of last year [2002], and, between June and March, we actually flew about 4,000 sorties against the integrated air defense system in Iraq and against surface-to-air missiles and their command and control.” General T. Michael Moseley, the “air boss” for Iraqi Freedom and now the Air Force vice chief of staff, explained in a wartime press conference, “We’ve been involved in Operation Northern Watch for well over 4,000 days … [and] Operation Southern Watch for well over 3,800 days. … We’ve certainly had more preparation, pre-hostilities, than perhaps some people realize.” Before the Invasion of Iraq, the USAF had spent years “[s]ince the end of the first Gulf War,” flying, “hundreds of thousands of combat and support sorties over Iraq in two no-fly zones that enforced UN resolutions. Air operations intensified greatly in the final months before the start of the ground war.” In contrast, Russian soldiers advanced in Ukraine as the air war had just started. American planes had begun taking out Iraqi air defenses, airplanes, and airfields years before the primary ground invasion of Iraq in 2003.

During the 2022 Invasion of Ukraine, as the Russian invasion was initiated, the Russian Aerospace Forces and artillery units scrambled to take out Ukrainian Surface-to-air Missile (SAM) systems and jet fighters. However, Ukrainian air-defense systems had already been scattered by Ukranian commanders prior to the invasion. Russian soldiers had trouble finding and targeting air-defense systems and American defense officials, as well as satellite imagery and on-the-ground photos and reports have shown that the Ukrainian air-defense apparatus remains “effective and in use”. Most Ukrainian SAM systems, like the Buk, a mobile anti-air missile launcher, have radars that aren’t able to target low-flying aircraft as they are disrupted by the curvature of the Earth. Therefore, many Russian pilots have taken to flying close to the ground to avoid SAM anti-aircraft systems. However, this presents another problem for Russian air support as Western nations have been supplying Ukraine with man-portable air defense systems (MANPADS). MANPADS are handheld and can be used to shoot down low flying aircraft. Recent videos have shown the Ukrainian army using Stingers, a type of MANPADS supplied by the United States and Baltic nations, to take down low flying helicopters. The Ukrainian military has used these systems donated by western countries against Russian aircraft. The Russian Aerospace Forces in Ukraine have had a minimal amount of equipment and personnel and had much less time to fly sorties against Ukrainian air defenses than the Americans in the Invasion of Iraq. Therefore, many Ukrainian air defenses and planes have been left operational during the opening stages of the war.

Furthermore, to avoid radar systems, Russian airplanes have flown extremely close to the ground, making them susceptible to MANPADS. The Russian Aerospace Forces failed miserably at their task in achieving total superiority of the skies. Therefore, Ukrainian pilots have still been able to deny Russia superiority over the skies, preventing Russia from supporting ground troops with air support and keeping Ukrainian military, civilian infrastructure, and supply lines relatively safe from assaults from the sky. Preventing Russia from gaining air superiority over Ukraine has been vital in protecting military, medical and food supplies coming into Ukraine from its western borders, allowing the Ukrainian army and government to continue holding out against their eastern adversaries and resupplying and replenishing their frontline units.

The Russian Armed Forcces heavily miscalculated Ukrainian resistance and neglected to secure rear positions and vital transportation links, causing supply issues for frontline soldiers. Moreover, Putin’s difficulties with achieving air superiority and inability to resupply his units with necessary equipment and food have caused him to suffer embarrassing losses on the battlefield and the world stage. However, it is important to note that Putin’s difficulties thus far do not necessarily mean that Ukraine can win a conventional ground war against Russia. The brave resistance of Ukraine’s people and blunders by Russian military planners and strategists have been responsible for Putin’s struggles on the battlefield thus far.
