---
layout: post
title: "The Playbook to an Emerging WWIII"
author: "Colin Levine"
feature_image: /cogito-xii-pictures/levine.jpeg
categories:
  - Cogito-XII
  - Articles
---
On February 24, 2022, the free world awoke in horror to see Russian forces engaged in an all-out assault against Ukrainian infrastructure, civilians, and independence. The Biden Administration, in coordination with the European Union, Canada, and many others, immediately responded with an expansive list of sanctions. Subsequently, the United States has banned virtually all imports from Russia, including oil and natural gas, and frozen all Russian assets in the United States. Essentially isolated from the global market, the Russian economy has fallen from 11th in the world to 22nd, and Russia’s currency, the ruble, has lost over 50% of its value. Nonetheless, the war rages on, the bombs continue to fall, and Russian President Vladimir Putin shows no intention of stopping. Furthermore, most of Europe has proven unable to sufficiently combat Russian aggression; the European Union has refused to cut off Russian imports due to its reliance on Russian oil. Likewise, the Western World continues to resist removing Russia from the SWIFT global interbank payments system, allowing Russia to maintain some role in the international market.

Thus, the question remains unanswered: how can the Western world best further Ukraine’s and its own interests? The vague middle ground of incomplete sanctions and refusal to fight has proven irredeemably ineffective. Putin has committed too much of his resources, military, and presidential legacy to the annexation of Ukraine to accept anything less than absolute victory, and with hundreds of billions of dollars in insured personal wealth, his citizens’ growing poverty worries him little. There remain two alternatives with any true viability. Either the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) can commit its military to the defense of the free world, or the Western world can accept Europe’s inevitable return to Cold War lines.

The first option promises nothing short of a third World War, with modern weaponry far more catastrophic than that of the 1940s. Several more passive military measures have been proposed. For instance, the European Union could accept Ukraine as a member, meaning that the European Union no-fly zone for Russian aircraft would apply to Ukrainian airspace. Under this proposal, the European Union would be obligated to shoot down any Russian war planes attacking Ukrainian cities, and Ukraine would be militarily protected from Russian air assaults. However, it is unlikely that this single action would deter Putin from continued invasion. A transgressive Russian plane would end up shot down, and Putin would be forced to declare total war on Europe. Therefore, it is necessary to acknowledge that any military action from Ukraine’s allies would inevitably result in a full-scale global conflict. Any reasonable leader would, of course, shy away from such a disastrous proposition, but Putin’s steadfast dream for a restored Soviet Union may leave no other choice. Indeed, if he is allowed to annex Ukraine, it is quite likely that he will press on, sending his forces into Poland, the Baltic states, and the rest of the former USSR. Former EU Ambassador to Russia Vygaudas Ušackas agrees, writing that “[Putin’s] endgame is to push Russian borders as far West as possible.” Unlike Ukraine, these nations are members of NATO, meaning that the West would be contractually bound to commit to their defense. Therefore, if the United States sees its diplomatic agreements as its be-all and end-all, a world war is all but inevitable. As Ušackas continues, “While we [Balts] appreciate assurances of support, what we need are American boots on the ground.” Without Western military involvement, Putin will be able to recapture his nation’s former territorial glory, subjugating the Baltic people and countless more on the way. Why not face the tyrant today, rather than allowing him the time to recollect and refuel his economy and military?

However, I would pose the more important question: why should we allow an ages-old treaty to force the deaths of millions of American soldiers? Beyond words and signatures, the United States has little personal interest in the independence of Eastern Europe. For the first two hundred years of the United States, most of Eastern Europe, including Ukraine, was a part of the Russian nation. Never did that reality cause any detriments to the economic and geopolitical interests of the West, which saw unfettered peace, economic growth, and international trade, including with the Soviet East in more recent years. Moreover, it would seem that the Ukrainian people could prosper far more as a part of a renovated Soviet Union than they presently do. The average Russian citizen is far more wealthy than the average Ukrainian, as Russians have more than twice the median wealth of Ukrainians. Furthermore, not only does Russia’s Human Development Index rank more than 20 places above Ukraine’s, but Ukraine’s HDI ranking has fallen by 36 places since it left the Soviet Union; the UNDP, therefore, agrees that Ukrainian citizens more enjoyed “a long and healthy life, being knowledgeable, and a decent standard of living” in the mid-20th century, as Soviet citizens. Indeed, notwithstanding idealistic rhetoric around “democracy,” it would seem that a return to Russian occupation would benefit the livelihood of the Ukrainian people. Certainly, the Ukrainian people would prefer to return to daily life, rather than seeing their homes and offices obliterated by a disastrous war. Diplomatic integrity is a valuable asset, but throwing the American economy and citizenry into a futile conflict in Eastern Europe is simply not worth the badge of honor. In the worst case, should NATO forces be on the brink of capturing Putin, he could even mobilize his nuclear arsenal against American cities. War will only result in the destruction of Ukraine, Europe, and the world as a whole, and the facade of fruitless sanctions will never produce an armistice. Therefore, the world would do best to remember the peace and prosperity of the 20th century and give Russia back its historic territory.
