---
layout: post
title: "The Future of Global Nuclear Warfare"
author: "Max Daniello"
feature_image: /cogito-xiii-pictures/daniello.jpeg
categories:
  - Cogito-XIII
  - Articles
---
The term “nuclear warfare” is often inappropriately overused as if it’s a common occurrence waiting to happen again. With the rise in conflict between Russia and Ukraine, worries about the ramifications of Russia using its nuclear capabilities have increased. Nuclear bombs have been tested numerous times throughout history, but the last war time deployment was August 6th, 1945 in Hiroshima, Japan. So, why do we hear about nuclear warfare so often when these bombs have not been launched in 80 years? The answer is simple: The sheer mass destruction of these weapons makes governments worried about what nations could do with such dangerous weapons regardless of whether it's likely they would launch them. The threat, or even mention, of such action can easily spur conversation within global media.  It’s said that Russia may use their nuclear power to take control of Ukraine, but Putin would be foolish to take such advanced measures. Nuclear wars don’t happen because nations understand the vast destruction of nuclear missiles and realize the reality of mutual destruction. 

In the case of August 6th, 1945, it was the two nuclear bombs launched by the U.S at Nagasaki and Hiroshima Japan that ended World War II. The “Little Boy” and the “Fat Man” were the two bombs dropped during the time. The “Little Boy” had a blast radius of approximately one mile and a similar power level to that of 15,000 tons of TNT. The “Fat Man,” launched at Nagasaki, had a slightly larger blast radius of 1.2 miles, not including the radiation caused by the nuke, and a power level more similar to that of 20,000 tons of TNT. Since those detonations, nations have been busy at work developing vastly more devastating weapons. By 1945, the U.S had developed two types of nuclear bombs. Today, the U.S has access to more than 5,500 nuclear weapons and Russia has access to approximately 6,200. One of the strongest nukes either country has access to now is the “Castle Bravo,” the largest nuclear bomb ever tested by the U.S. In comparison to the “Little Boy” from 1945, it is about 1,000 times more devastating with a blast radius of 4.5 miles, not including the 19 miles of radiation spread in all directions. Throughout history, it’s been made abundantly clear why nations only use these powerful weapons as final measures due to their devastating nature. 

Now, how and why did this happen? Russia and the U.S have consistently battled for military superiority through nuclear power. Their number of nukes have only grown, and now, both countries are presented with a vast reserve of nuclear power. Considering the history of the fight for nuclear power, it is likely  Russia will not use nuclear weapons against Ukraine. If Putin were to unleash such attacks, the backlash against Russia would be damaging to Putin’s authority. Military action would be taken by the U.S and other countries would wipe out Russia’s already weakened military defense and destroy Putin’s rule. This allows one to understand the rarity, and high stakes of nuclear attacks. Similar to the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962, a moment of tension between Cuba and the U.S when both parties aimed nuclear missiles at each other, nuclear war is limited by inevitable mutual destruction. Why would leaders want to use nuclear weapons, if they knew that responsive missiles would come right back at them after use? Nuclear missiles not only leave cities and towns in ruins, but they also destroy economies and devastate the lives of those who may have survived. 78 schools were totalled during the Hiroshima bombing leaving the thousands still alive unable to be educated. This is the reason why a future nuclear war is uncommon. Now, it would be foolish to say that there is no chance of Putin unleashing nuclear bombs on Ukraine, but the cons clearly outweigh the pros for him to do so. 

Despite a slight grasp on the near future of nuclear attacks, the evolution of nuclear warfare hundreds or thousands of years into the future remains unknown. The Nuclear Holocaust is a theoretical scenario where the mass detonation of nuclear weapons causes globally widespread destruction and radioactive fallout. Such a scenario means large parts of the Earth becoming uninhabitable due to the effects of nuclear warfare, potentially causing the collapse of civilization, and in the worst case, extinction of humanity or of life on Earth. Aside from the instant destruction of large cities, the firestorms, nuclear winter, and radiation sickness would be the cause of death for most life on earth. While the cause of such an event is difficult to be inferred, it is still interesting to understand how much damage these weapons can really do. The debris and smoke caused by the explosions would block the sun’s rays from entering the atmosphere, creating a cold and dark climate throughout most of the planet. 
It’s easy to underestimate the vast power of nuclear weapons, especially nowadays when talks of such weaponry are common during global conflict. It is important to understand the power of these weapons, but also the consequences for using them, and how they could affect the future of humanity. 
