---
layout: post
title: "An Analysis of China-Taiwan Relations"
author: "Kate Wei"
feature_image: /cogito-xiii-pictures/wei.jpeg
categories:
- Cogito-XIII
- Articles
---
Taiwan, officially the Republic of China (ROC), is an island off the coast of Mainland China that since 1949, has been governed independently of the People’s Republic of China (PRC). Relationships between Taiwan and China have been plagued by tensions that stem from the Chinese Civil War, when the ROC government was forced to flee from mainland China to Taiwan by the Chinese Communist Party. While Taiwan maintains its claim that it is an independent country, the PRC still views Taiwan as a renegade province and has repeatedly vowed to unify Taiwan with the mainland, even through force if necessary. Tensions have been escalating since the election of Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen in 2016, who has strayed from a path set by her predecessor that would have allowed for improved cross-strait relations. Beijing, for its part, has started to take increasingly aggressive actions such as launching joint military exercises around Taiwan in response to United States House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s visit to Taipei. 

Cross-strait dynamics have displayed three clear trends since President Tsai Ing-wen’s election: a growing sense of Taiwanese nationalism, rising Chinese anxieties over the Taiwanese political environment, and the United States’ shifting role in Chinese-Taiwenese affairs. First, the Taiwanese public has become more distrustful of and less open to Chinese influence. Today, about two-thirds of citizens identify as “Taiwanese,” a population that has been trending upward since first polled in 1992, when only 17.6% of respondents identified as “Taiwanese.” Given Taiwan’s history, this is a significant shift that is being represented in Taiwanese politics. As young people in Taiwan develop a stronger sense of nationalistic pride and begin to see themselves more as Taiwanese and less as Chinese, upcoming generations are less likely to be supportive of unification. The majority of people in Taiwan reject unification because they view Taiwanese culture as distinct from Chinese culture, and because they harbor negative sentiment toward the PRC government. This indicates that as the PRC’s policies and efforts to unify Taiwan with the mainland become more aggressive and hostile towards Taiwan, it will only increase Taiwanese resentment of China and make cross-strait relations even more difficult.

Second, China’s anxieties over Taiwanese political trends have risen. In accordance with its “One China” principle, Beijing has long asserted that Taiwan’s only possible futures are unification or independence, the latter of which the PRC has threatened to respond to with violence. China continues to deny Taiwan’s de facto independence, but increasing demonstrations of support for Taiwan by the United States and other allies have shown China that Taiwan could possibly declare de jure autonomy on a global scale. To discourage this, Beijing has attempted to pressure the Taiwanese government through diplomatic, economic, and military means. For example, Beijing has made a practice of detaining Taiwanese politicians, embargoing Taiwanese goods, launching live-fire missile demonstrations off the coast, and conducting cyber attacks. 

Finally, the United States’ involvement in China-Taiwan affairs has only furthered divisions and heightened tensions. China exerts significant diplomatic pressure on other countries, including the United States, to not recognise Taiwan or take any actions that could imply recognition. As such, the United States has no official diplomatic relations with Taiwan, but instead declares a “robust unofficial relationship.” Washington’s efforts include maintaining contact with Taipei, providing Taiwan with a steady supply of weapons to defend itself, and continuing to advocate for Taiwan’s participation in international organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO). While the United States claims that these actions are consistent with Beijing’s  “One China” policy, mainland China tends to interpret these actions as ploys to lead Taiwan to declare de jure independence. 

Adding to the confusion, all three sides (Taiwan, China, and the United States) have created an escalatory policy spiral. The pattern starts when one side issues a statement or takes an action that they believe aligns with existing policy. However, this is then perceived by the other side as a change to the status quo that calls for a counter response. A recent example of this was United States House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s visit to Taiwan on August 2, 2022. From Washington’s perspective, this was a visit from a normal congressional delegation that demonstrated support for Taiwan as a whole, not necessarily support for Taiwanese independence. Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Colin Kahl remarked, “Nothing about the visit changed one iota of the US government’s policy toward Taiwan.” However, Beijing has stressed that a visit from such a high ranking member of the United States government was in itself provocatory and sent the wrong signal to those in favor of Taiwanese independence. Following Pelosi’s visit, Beijing launched several large-scale military exercises, which Washington claims were an unwarranted escalation of the situation. As shown, this dangerous action-reaction cycle has the potential to rapidly escalate milder political conflicts to armed military crises.

As such, a major foreign policy objective is to preserve peace and stability across the strait in the long term. While Beijing could suddenly leave behind its claims to Taiwan in an attempt to maintain regional stability, the odds of this occurring are rather slim as it would necessitate major political change within China. Likewise, the United States could step back and allow China to invade the island, but this would not only contradict fundamental American beliefs and interests but also shatter America’s credibility with its allies. To ensure long term peace, the United States, Taiwan, and China must find a way to comfortably coexist with one another, which will require negotiations on all sides. For example, the United States and Taiwan would have to work together to defend Taiwan and remove China's option of unification by force. This would likely demand a clear commitment on the United States’ part to defend Taiwan, communicated through measures that may currently be viewed as dangerous and provocative, such as senior-level engagement and bilateral military exercises to deter China. Additionally, Chinese fears of Taiwanese separation from the mainland would have to be alleviated. This could involve publicly renouncing any moves to formalize Taiwan’s autonomy, which may not sit well with some members of the Taiwanese public and government but would be necessary to establish any lasting peace. 

Taiwan and China share a strained history that has been translated into modern day politics, with the United States’ involvement only complicating matters. Current trends indicate that the tensions between their respective governments are not close to resolving and instead are unfortunately only on the rise. To settle these grievances, all parties involved must engage in careful negotiation and be willing to make compromises to ensure lasting peace and stability across the strait.