---
layout: post
title: "Guantanamo Bay: Why the Internationally-Condemned Military Detention Center Has Still Not Closed"
author: "Clare Struzziery"
feature_image: /cogito-xiii-pictures/struzziery.jpeg
categories:
- Cogito-XIII
- Articles
---
The Biden administration has made clear to the nation that the president intends to close the Guantanamo Bay detention camp during his presidency. Biden is the third president to declare this, and whether he will finally end the internationally-condemned military prison remains in question. Established in the wake of the 9/11 attacks, the prison has served as a central component of the US War on Terror. Guantanamo Bay, or Gitmo, as it is commonly known, carries with it a history of intense debate that has divided the nation since the prison’s founding in 2002. Organizations like Amnesty International and the International Committee of the Red Cross have condemned the detention facility for human rights violations, and US allies like the European Union previously called on former US President Barack Obama to close the prison. The US judiciary system found its own detention center to be in violation of international prisoner-of-war laws, and US citizens have created a fierce movement to shut its doors forever. Yet, this international frenzy of criticism has been unsuccessful in closing the prison, despite the promises of multiple US presidents. The Guantanamo Bay detention center’s roots in the War on Terror have led to its endurance as a formidable, yet deeply flawed symbol of American determination against evil.  

The prison at Guantanamo Bay has been problematic since its establishment. After the devastation of the attacks of September 11, 2001, President George W. Bush convinced the nation to embark on a “Global War on Terror” that would go on to have lasting international implications. According to the Bush administration, the goal of the campaign was to “seek out and stop terrorists around the world.”  As part of the effort, the US invaded Afghanistan and Iraq, funneled trillions of dollars into the military, and drastically improved its intelligence system to better track down and capture terrorists. The increased quantity of accused terrorists in the hands of the US government required an immediate solution. The decision by President Bush to construct a detention facility outside of the US was a strategic one. Guantanamo Bay was constructed in Cuba to keep suspected terrorists far from US soil. Perhaps more importantly, the US government was able to create an “‘island outside the law’” where prisoners were not protected by the US Constitution. The purpose of creating Guantanamo Bay was to minimize US accountability. A lack of government responsibility was crucial to the US’ ongoing Global War on Terror. The U.S. government wanted to be able to use whatever methods necessary to imprison large numbers of terrorists and project a zero-tolerance policy for terrorist activity on an international stage. 

Guantanamo Bay’s numerous flagrant violations of international law stand as a testament to the intensity of the US’s Global War on Terror. Human rights associations have taken issue with the facility’s system of indefinite detention without trial, as well as the numerous reports of torture that have occurred in the prison. The Bush administration decried these reports as false. Still, a Guantanamo official conceded that “the detainee suspected as a would-be hijacker in the September 11 attacks could not be prosecuted because he had been tortured.”  This admission constitutes a powerful example of Guantanamo’s status as an exception to the law: torture is illegal within the US, yet the US government commits it in an outside location. These contradictions prove the US government’s deep commitment to aggression against terrorists. This same determination is present in the prison’s use of controversial military commissions, a system used to try Guantanamo Bay detainees within the prison’s facilities. These commissions are secret trials held within the prison that feature a series of government-selected officials and are designed with the sole intent of proving prisoners guilty, allowing the presentation of evidence obtained through torture, which is outlawed in all US courts. In 2006, the US Supreme Court found the military commissions in violation of the Third Geneva Convention, an international treaty on the treatment of prisoners of war, and the Uniform Code of Military Justice, a federal law. This decision was momentous, as the US government publicly and legally recognized that the Guantanamo Bay military commissions do not adhere to the laws of the nation. However, soon after, Congress passed the Military Commissions Act, which gave these trials complete legal protection. The War on Terror was such a priority in government decision-making that it would sanction practices that blatantly violated national values. 

The history of Guantanamo Bay presidential policy exhibits the War on Terror’s lasting effects on the nation. On his second day in office, US President Barack Obama declared his intention to close the prison within a year. Obama planned to transfer the prisoners to a facility within the US. However, both Democrats and Republicans in Congress voted to pass laws that outlawed the detention of these prisoners in the US, rendering Obama’s plan a failure. Closing Guantanamo Bay will never be a unanimous decision, as these politicians proved. Part of the reason why the facility has survived such extreme condemnation is the fact that the US has no other safe option. These prisoners were put into Guantanamo Bay because they were believed to be a direct threat to national security, so many politicians fear the possible safety consequences and political unpopularity of bringing these prisoners directly onto US soil. For this reason, the institution is difficult to take down. 

The War on Terror is what created the Guantanamo Bay detention center, and is why the prison has stood the test of both internal and external condemnation. The terror and grief of the 9/11 attacks shook America to its core and created a dramatic turning point in US government policy against terrorism embodied in Bush’s Global War on Terror. The movement’s deep determination against any and all global terrorism was shown in full force in the establishment of Guantanamo Bay. The facility was designed to be a place where US government officials could carry out this crusade against global terrorism with minimal national accountability. These suspected terrorists were imprisoned indefinitely, tortured, and charged or even convicted with crimes in unfair military commissions. Guantanamo Bay’s human rights violations certainly did not go unnoticed by the public. Human rights organizations called for the camp’s immediate closure, and the US judiciary system decided that the camp violated federal and international law. The fact that the US was able to get away with crimes that violated such core national principles is a testament to the strength of this campaign against terrorism. Guantanamo Bay is an enduring international symbol, not of the values of the United States, but of its determined, aggressive War on Terror.