---
layout: post
title: "Giorgia Meloni: Italy's Recently Intransigent Rector"
author: "Corban Shih"
feature_image: /cogito-xiii-pictures/shih.jpeg
categories:
  - Cogito-XIII
  - Articles
---
Difendiamo Dio, Patria E Famiglia – roughly translating to “Defend God, the Fatherland, and Family” – was a popular Mussolini-era expression used to promote Italy’s National Fascist Party. The phrase was found at every corner of Fascist Italy, plastered onto the walls of villages, office entrances, and schoolbooks. Over the course of history, Difendiamo Dio, Patria E Famiglia became known as the heart and soul of far-right Italian policy. More importantly, it is also the slogan of Italy's newly incumbent Prime Minister, Giorgia Meloni. 

In the September 25 general election, 44% of voters cast their ballots in favor of Meloni’s ultraconservative Brothers of Italy Party, all but guaranteeing her victory. Meloni’s victory is troubling for a multitude of reasons, one of which being her party’s deep-rooted connections to former dictator Benito Mussolini and his rhetoric. Mussolini’s National Fascist Party was founded in 1921 and ceased operations in 1943. Immediately after, in 1946, the Italian Social Movement (MSI) rose out of the Nationalist Party’s ashes as a post-fascist and national-conservative party. The remaining supporters of Mussolini were able to found the MSI because Italy never experienced a period equivalent to Germany’s de-Nazification following World War II. The MSI operated until 1995, when it was flipped into the National Alliance (AN) by Gianfranco Fini. Despite the shift in nomenclature, not much changed within the party policy-wise, as the AN was still characterized by post-fascist, anti-immigrant, and xenophobic views. In 2009, the AN finally merged with the People of Freedom (PDL), the center-right party. This was seemingly the end of post-fascism in Italy, that is, until the 2012 schism in the party that resulted in Meloni breaking off from the PDL to form a neoconservative sect known as the Brothers of Italy. While it may be a logical jump to call Meloni and her party fascist, it is undeniable that there are many connections – whether they be direct or indirect – that link the two. 

In terms of policy, Meloni operates on an agenda dominated by themes of anti-human rights and euroscepticism. Meloni threatens to reverse integral progress made by the Italian government in recent years, as she is is outwardly anti-LGBTQ+, anti-abortion, and anti-immigration. She hopes to place same-sex unions under review, and is proud to oppose their 2016 legalization. “Say yes to the natural family, no to LGBT lobbies!” She repeatedly cried out at a recent rally. Furthermore, she is on the record calling abortion a “tragedy,” furthering fears about the safety of women’s rights in Italy. She is also vehemently opposed to non-Christian immigrants and multiculturalism, and has even gone so far as to support a naval blockade stopping immigration. Evidently, the first prong of Meloni’s agenda is to reverse the social progression Italy has made in lieu of post-fascist politics. 

The second part of her agenda is the doctrine of euroscepticism, an ideology centered around criticism of the European Union (EU) and the integration of Europe. These ideas are dangerous because Italy’s politics have historically foreshadowed those of the rest of Europe and even the world. “Italy had Mussolini before Hitler and the leftwing extremist Red Brigades before Action Directe appeared in France and the Red Army Faction followed suit in Germany. Italy had Berlusconi before the US got Trump.” Meloni’s doctrine of a “Europe of Nations” would advocate for the dissolving of the EU and the development of a multitude of solitary states. Ultimately, Meloni’s victory places a weakened Europe in grave danger due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

Conclusively, by imposing her extremist values upon Italy, Giorgia Meloni could have what looks to be a very destructive impact upon her country. She is Italy’s most far-right leader since Mussolini, and unprecedented change could be knocking on Europe’s door. 
