---
layout: post
title: "Big Budget Films: The Destruction of Creativity in Hollywood"
author: "Max Daniello"
feature_image: /cogito-xiv-pictures/daniello.jpg
categories:
  - Cogito-XIV
  - Articles
---
Think of the last time you went to see a movie. Were there intense fight scenes, explosions, and other computer generated imagery? Maybe the film starred a high paying actor like Brad Pitt, Tom Holland, or Margot Robbie. After all, most films we see in theaters nowadays involve big budget effects and expensive actors. Over the last 50 years, the art of filmmaking has undergone a massive transformation in terms of technology, storytelling, and production. Filmmaking techniques and how the public consumes films have shifted due changes in including politics and a plethora of creative and technical advancements that have revolutionized the industry. 

One of the most noticeable changes in filmmaking over the last five decades is the rise of production companies such as Marvel and Disney. While studios like Warner Bros. and Paramount Pictures dominated the industry in the past, studios like Marvel and Disney have emerged as dominant players in the industry today. These production houses have created some of the most successful and beloved film franchises in recent memory. For example, the Marvel Cinematic Universe, which began with the release of "Iron Man" in 2008, has grown into a cinematic empire with over 20 films in its catalog, each contributing to an overarching narrative. Marvel's focus on creating interconnected stories has kept audiences engaged and invested in the characters, leading to its massive success. In fact, it’s grossed a total of $26 billion in box office revenue, which is more than double that of the Star Wars franchise. MCU films typically involve high budget effects like explosions, car crashes, and lots of action sequences. Not to mention the high paying actors like Chris Evans, Samuel L. Jackson, Scarlett Johanson, and so many more. The average budget for each MCU project is $130 million. Not only that, but the average profit for each of these films is more than $700 million; so, it’s clear that people enjoy these movies. But how did this love for CGI (Computer Generated Imagery) start? What caused people to flood into the theaters to watch these films. 

Well, Star Wars, which started in 1977 with the release of A New Hope, has always been at the forefront of technological advancements in filmmaking. From the groundbreaking special effects in the original film to the use of motion capture in The Last Jedi, the franchise has consistently pushed the boundaries of what is possible in filmmaking. At the time, green and blue screens weren’t invented and CGI wasn’t an option either. Instead George Lucas, the director of Star Wars, used miniatures and stop motion to bring spaceships, and ATAT Walkers to life. With a budget of $11 million, Star Wars: A New Hope grossed about $775 million making it clear that audiences have always loved special effects. 

However, the increased use of technology in filmmaking has had both positive and negative impacts. While films like "Star Wars" and "The Avengers" may be visually stunning, they may lack the depth and emotional resonance of films from the 20th century. Movies like “Taxi Driver”  and “The Godfather” dealt with issues such as corruption, violence, and social injustice. While there are movies today that focus on similar topics, they are not nearly as mainstream as the Disney, Universal Studios, and Paramount Picture action movies that come
out each year. 

Filmmakers are relying more and more on flashy visuals and amazing stunts to pull the audience's attention rather than a deep and meaningful story. For instance, “The Grey Man,” starring Ryan Gosling and Chris Evans, had a budget of 200 million dollars and made a little over 400 million at the box office. It was a “fun” movie with nonstop action and intense effects, but nothing about its story and themes were revolutionary and emotionally resonant. Later that year, “The Banshees of Inisherin” was released starring Colin Farrel and Brendan Gleeson with a budget of 20 million dollars. It received 40 million at the box office. The film explored loneliness, mutilation, and longing. It also explained the issues present in the Irish Civil War through the relationship between the two main characters. As seen by this comparison, there's no doubt that the vast majority of people prefer big-budget, “fun” action movies. 

This shift in movie ideas can be attributed to various factors, including changing cultural attitudes and the desire for entertainment that is less confronting and more optimistic. While some may argue that this shift has led to a decline in the quality of storytelling, it can also be noted that these types of films can offer a valuable form of escapism in a turbulent world.

Furthermore, the distribution of films has also changed over the past 50 years with the rise of digital platforms and streaming services like Netflix and Amazon Prime Video. This has allowed filmmakers to reach a more extensive and diverse audience and has changed the way movies are consumed. 

The availability of films on digital platforms has also led to the democratization of filmmaking. With more accessible and affordable technology, aspiring filmmakers can now create and distribute their movies without the need for massive production budgets. This has resulted in a more diverse range of stories and voices being represented in cinema, making it more inclusive and representative of our society. Hopefully, streaming services continue to support small production companies and allow for more complex storytelling to grab the attention of the viewer. 