---
layout: post
title: "Media Distrust: What is New?"
author: "Sofia Branco"
feature_image: /cogito-xiv-pictures/branco.jpg
categories:
  - Cogito-XIV
  - Articles
---
While media distrust was a relevant topic around the election in 2020, it is now time to revisit where Americans' trust in the media remains. As a result of the stark political divide during 2020, media outlets grew increasingly polarized, promoting information that relied on opinion rather than fact. Additionally, media outlets employing sensationalism tactics to promote their viewpoints have set a dangerous precedent for American journalism.  Essentially, distrust in the media has virtually remained the same since the start of the Trump days. According to an October 2022 Gallup poll, “34%, Americans' trust in the mass media to report the news ‘fully, accurately and fairly’ is essentially unchanged from last year and just two points higher than the lowest that Gallup has recorded, in 2016 during the presidential campaign.” Thus, distrust in the media has generally remained the same since the start of the Trump days. Currently, as Trump’s influence in the media continues to dwindle, the statistics prove the distrust that was inspired since the start of the Trump days still remains.

Trump transformed the media in the eyes of Americans and depicted it as “the enemy of the American people” For one, Trump has called out journalists and media outlets for promoting “‘fake news’ nearly 2,000 times since the beginning of his presidency”. Although this term is no longer heard on the news daily from Trump, the repercussions of his actions are lasting. Americans now believe that the media is trying to deceive them and according to a Gallup and Knight Foundation report: “Half of Americans in a recent survey indicated they believe national news organizations intend to mislead, misinform or persuade the public to adopt a particular point of view through their reporting”. This suggests the “fake news” problem that Trump enabled correlates to the rising distrust in the media. The  New York Times wrote, “journalism is not a public service; it’s a business. The most influential journalists today are employees of large corporations, and their work product is expected to be profitable”. It is important to recognize the inherent bias and motives media outlets have.

One positive is that more people than ever are fact checking the news. With so many online news sources and 24/7 reporting, fact-checking is necessary for people to ensure they are receiving the correct story. Security.org, in a recent study, found that “​​nine out of 10 American adults fact-check their news, and 96 percent want to limit the spread of false information”. As people realize there is bias in reporting and begin to fact check news they are becoming better consumers of media.

At the same time, ratings have decreased for television news compared to those of the Trump days when he was a source of constant news and controversy. The ratings may have gone down now because of lack of interest, but the distrust of the media drives them down further. Reuters reported that, “A growing number of people are selectively avoiding important news stories such as the coronavirus pandemic, Russia's invasion of Ukraine, and the cost-of-living crisis” because they do not believe the information being shared on these topics is entirely accurate. Not only is this harmful because people are less aware of important news stories, but the possibility of social media serving as a news outlet is increased. Social media has a higher chance of not being accurate since professional journalists are not producing this content. The distrust of the media and decreased appetite for news has resulted in more news avoidance and ultimately in less informed people.

The future of trust within the media will be revealed in time especially with the 2024 presidential election looming around the corner. If Trump decides to run again in 2024, it is certain he will bring up claims of fake news again and bring people back to watching the news. In the meantime, before the election, we should continue to fact check while remaining consumers of important news stories.
