---
layout: post
title: "Steps Toward Growth: Feminism in China"
author: "Ashley Wang"
feature_image: /cogito-xii-pictures/wang.jpeg
categories:
- Cogito-XII
- Articles
---
March is Women’s History Month, a time to celebrate the contributions women have made throughout history and in the present. Within this month, there is International Women’s Day, which is on March 8th. In 1975, the United Nations decided to honor an event from March 8th, 1917, when a group of women in Russia commenced a strike and protest for suffrage and peace. While Women’s History month and International Women’s Day are  prominent parts of American culture, they are not as largely recognized in China. Despite this, feminism in China has been gaining attraction and support in recent times.

International Women’s Day has been widely celebrated throughout the United States ever since it was established by the UN in 1975. However, the feminist movement in the country originated  nearly two centuries ago. Beginning with the Seneca Falls Convention in New York on July 19, 1848, feminism in the United States blossomed in the years to come. The Seneca Falls Convention sparked activism by producing the Declaration of Sentiments, which fought for women’s right to equality as U.S. citizens under the Constitution. This nameley included the right to vote and other unalienable rights. This was the first mass gathering of women to address and advocate for women’s rights, and was a momentous occasion in propelling the movement of feminism in the U.S. The United States’ long history with feminism and the progress from activism is a notable cause for celebration, especially during Women’s History Month and the respective International Women’s Day.

On the other hand, feminism and culture surrounding women’s rights has had less of an impact in many other regions of the globe, in particular, China. China has had an especially adverse relationship with advancing women’s rights. Starting in the tenth century, practices that confined women to house work became normalized in social culture. During this time period, Chinese beauty standards considered women with small feet to be more attractive than those with normal sized feet. A common practice to achieve this physical deformity, foot-binding, was a process where a young girl’s toes were bent under the bottom of their feet with tight cloth and remained so for their entire life, forcing many women into house work jobs. Foot-binding was outlawed in 1912, just 110 years ago, and even so, it still took many decades for the practice to stop in actuality. This is only one practice among many in which Chinese culture oppressed women and forced them into traditional homemaker roles which kept them from joining the workforce, finding personal freedom, and striving for economic success. Social change in China in regards to feminism has had a later start than that of the U.S., and moreover, stemmed from a far more oppressive background. However, feminism in China has been gaining more attention recently.

For instance, Eileen Gu, an Asian-American, competed for China in the recent 2022 Beijing Winter Olympics in freestyle skiing. In doing so, she has been an inspiring yet controversial figure for social change for women in China. Many believe Gu to be inspiring through her demographic, as an Asian American female, represented in media, particularly as an Olympic athlete. While her intentions for competing for China regarding monetary value remain ambiguous, it stands to reason that her decision has significantly aided her modeling career. The ambiguity surrounding the benefits she received from sponsorships in competing for China further fueled the already trenchant controversy around her decision to represent the country. Moreover, Gu wishes to represent young women in China and beyond. However,  Gu grew up in an affluent neighborhood of San Francisco and attended an elite private school. It becomes increasingly clear with the information provided regarding Gu’s childhood and educational background that there is an undeniable disparity between her social status and those of the average Chinese woman. Eileen Gu encapsulates two perspectives of feminism from the U.S. and China alike. While Gu represents the possibilities and opportunities of women in the U.S. through achieving great accomplishments in athletics and in the workforce as a model, as well as pursuing a high level of education, she also claims to represent women of China. As an Asian-American woman in the U.S her “symbolism of women in China” only goes to highlight the differences between the social statuses of women in China and the U.S.
